<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Jesuitism</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:essay">
		<section id="jesuitism" epub:type="chapter">
            <header>
                <h2>
                    <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
                    <br/>
                    <span epub:type="subtitle">Jesuitism</span>
                </h2>
                <p epub:type="se:essay.dateline">1st August 1850</p>
            </header>
<p>As in the history of human things, which needs above all to
abridge itself, it happens usually that the chief actors in
great events and great epochs give their name to the series,
and are loosely reputed the causers and authors of them; as
a German Reformation is called of Luther, and a French
Reign of Terror passes for the work of Robespierre, and
from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Æneid</i> and earlier this has been the wont: so it
may be said these current, and now happily moribund, times of
ours are worthy to be called, in loose language, the Age of
Jesuitism,—an epoch whose Palinurus is the wretched mortal
known among men as Ignatius Loyola. For some two cen-
turies the genius of mankind has been dominated by the
gospel of Ignatius, perhaps the strangest and certainly among
the fatalest ever preached hitherto under the sun. Some
acquaintance, out of <i epub:type="se:name.person">Bartoli</i> and others, I have made with
that individual, and from old years have studied the workings
of him; and to me he seems historically definable, he more
than another, as the poison-fountain from which these rivers
of bitterness that now submerge the world have flowed.</p>
<p>Counting from the ‘ever-blessed Restoration,’ or the advent
of that singular new Defender of the Faith called Charles
Second, it is about two hundred years since we ourselves
commenced that bad course; and deeply detesting the <em>name</em>
of St. Ignatius, did nevertheless gradually adopt his gospel as
the real revelation of God’s will, and the solid rule of living
in this world; rule long since grown perfectly accredited,
complete in all its parts, and reigning supreme among us in all
spiritual and social matters whatsoever. The singular gospel,
or revelation of God’s will! That to please the supreme
Fountain of Truth your readiest method, now and then, was
to persist in believing what your whole soul found to be
doubtful or incredible. That poor human symbols were
higher than the God Almighty’s facts they symbolised; that
formulas, with or without the facts symbolised by them, were
sacred and salutary; that formulas, well persisted in, could
still save us when the facts were all fled! A new revelation
to mankind; not heard of in human experience, till Ignatius
revealed it to us. That, in substance, was the contribution
of Ignatius to the wellbeing of mankind. Under that
thrice-stygian gospel we have all of us, Papist and at length
Protestant too, this long while sat; a ‘doctrine of devils,’ I
do think, if there ever was one;—and are now, ever since
1789, with endless misery and astonishment, confusedly
awakening out of the same, uncertain whether towards swift
agony of social death, or towards slow martyrdom of recovery
into spiritual and social life. </p>
<p>Not that poor Loyola did all the feat himself,—any more
than Luther, Robespierre, and other such did in the parallel
cases. By no means. Not in his poor person shall the
wretched Loyola bear the guilt of poisoning the world: the
world was, as it were, in quest of poison; in the sure course
of being poisoned; and would have got it done by some one:
Loyola is the historical symbol to us of its being done. The
most conspicuous and ostentatious of the world’s poisoners;
who, solemnly consecrating all the rest in the name of holi-
ness or spiritual <em>Health</em>, has got the work of poisoning to go
on with never-imagined completeness and acceleration in all
quarters; and is worthy to have it called after him a
<i>Jesuitism</i>, and be blamed by men (how judged by God, we
know not) for doing it. That it is done, there is the sad
fact for us; which infinitely concerns every living soul of us;
what Ignatius got or is to get for doing it,—this shall not
concern us at all.</p>
<p>And so, before dismissing busy English readers to their
autumnal grouse-shooting,—the <i xml:lang="ar">ramadhan</i>, sacred fast, or
month of meditative solitude and devout prayer, now in use
among the English,—I have one sad thing to do: lead them
a little to the survey of Ignatius and our universal Jesuitism;
and ask them, in Heaven’s name, if they will answer such a
question, What they think of it, and of their share in it?
For this is the central and parent phenomenon; the great
Tartarean Deep, this, whence all our miseries, fatuities,
futilities spring; the accursed Hela’s realm, tenanted by foul
creatures, ministers of Death Eternal, out of which poor
mortals, each for himself, are called to escape if they can!
Who is there that can escape; that can become alive to the
terrible necessity of escaping? By way of finish to this
offensive and alarming set of Pamphlets, I have still one
crowning offence and alarm to try if I can give. The
message, namely, That under all those Cannibal Connaughts,
Distressed Needlewomen, and other woes nigh grown intoler-
able, there lies a still deeper Infinite of woe and guilt, charge-
able on every one of us; and that till this abate, essentially
those never will or can. </p>
<p>That our English solitaries, any noticeable number of
them, in their grouse <i xml:lang="ar">ramadhan</i>, or elsewhere, will accept the
message, and see this thing for my poor showing, is more
than I expect. Not willingly or joyfully do men become con-
scious that they are afloat, they and their affairs, upon the
Pool of Erebus, now nameless in polite speech; and that all
their miseries, social and private, are fountains springing out
of that, and like to spring perennially with ever more copious-
ness, till once you get away from that!—And yet who
knows? Here and there a thinking English soul, the reflec-
tion, the devotion, not yet quite deafened out of him by
perpetual noise and babble; such a soul,—left silent in the
solitude of some Highland corry, waiting perhaps till the
gillies drive his deer up to him, may catch a glimpse of it,
take a thought of it; may prosecute his thought; fling down,
with terror, his Joe-Manton and percussion-caps, and fly to a
better kind of <i xml:lang="ar">ramadhan</i>, towards another kind of life! Sure
enough, if one in the thousand see at all, in this sad matter,
what I see and have long seen in it, his life either suddenly or
gradually will alter in several particulars; and his sorrow,
apprehension and amazement will probably grow upon him,
the longer he considers this affair; and his life, I think, will
alter ever farther;—and he, this one in a thousand, will
forgive me, and be thankful to the Heavens and me, while he
continues in this world or in any world!—</p>
<hr/>
<p>The Spiritual, it is still often said, but is not now suffi-
ciently considered, is the parent and first-cause of the Practical.
The Spiritual everywhere originates the Practical, models it,
makes it: so that the saddest external condition of affairs,
among men, is but evidence of a still sadder internal one.
For as thought is the life-fountain and motive-soul of action,
so, in all regions of this human world, whatever outward
thing offers itself to the eye, is merely the garment or body
of a thing which already existed invisibly within; which,
striving to give itself expression, has found, in the given
circumstances, that it could and would express itself—so.
This is everywhere true; and in these times when men’s
attention is directed outward rather, this deserves far more
attention than it will receive.</p>
<p>Do you ask why misery abounds among us? I bid you
look into the notion we have formed for ourselves of this
Universe, and of our duties and destinies there. If it is
a true notion, we shall strenuously reduce it to practice,
for who dare or can contradict <em>faith</em>, whatever it may
be, in the Eternal Fact that is around him?—and thereby
blessings and success will attend us in said Universe, or
Eternal Fact we live amidst: of that surely there is no
doubt. All revelations and intimations, heavenly and earthly,
assure us of that; only a Philosophy of Bedlam could throw
a doubt on that! Blessings and success, most surely, if
our notion of this Universe, and our battle in it be a
true one; not curses and futilities, except it be not true.
For battle, in any case, I think we shall not want; harsh
wounds, and the heat of the day, we shall have to stand:
but it will be a noble godlike and human battle, not an
ignoble devil-like and brutal one; and our wounds, and sore
toils (what we in our impatience call ‘miseries’), will them-
selves be blessed to us.</p>
<p>But if, on the other hand, it were a false notion which we
believed; alas, if it were even a false notion which we only
pretended to believe? What battle can there be, in that
latter fatal case! Our faith, or notion of this Universe, is
not false only, but it is the father of falsity; a thing that
destroys itself, and is equivalent to the death of all notion,
all belief or motive to action, except what the appetites and
the astucities may yield. We have then the thrice-baleful
Universe of Cant, prophesied for these Latter Days; and no
‘battle,’ but a kind of bigger Donnybrook one, is possible for
hapless mortals till that alter. Faith, Fact, Performance, in
all high and gradually in all low departments, go about their
business; Inanity well tailored and upholstered, mild-spoken
Ambiguity, decorous Hypocrisy which is astonished you should
think it hypocritical, taking their room and drawing their
wages: from zenith to nadir, you have Cant, Cant,—a Uni-
verse of Incredibilities which are not even credited, which
each man at best only tries to persuade himself that he
credits. Do you expect a divine battle, with noble victories,
out of this? I expect a Hudson’s Statue from it, brisk
trade in scrip, with Distressed Needlewomen, Cannibal Con-
naughts, and other the like phenomena, such as we now
everywhere see!</p>
<p>Indisputably enough, what notion each forms of the Uni-
verse is the all-regulating fact with regard to him. The
Universe makes no immediate objection to be conceived in
any way; pictures itself as plainly in the seeing faculty
of Newton’s Dog Diamond, as of Newton; and yields to
each a result accurately corresponding. To the Dog Diamond
dogs’-meat, with its adjuncts, better or worse; to Newton
discovery of the System of the Stars.—Not the Universe’s
affair at all; but the seeing party’s affair very much, for
the results to each correspond, with exact proportion, to his
notion of it.</p>
<p>The saddest condition of human affairs, what ancient
Prophets denounced as ‘the Throne of Iniquity,’ where men
’decree injustice by a law’: all this, with its thousandfold
outer miseries, is still but a symptom; all this points to a far
sadder disease which lies invisible within! In new dialect,
whatever modified interpretation we may put upon it, the
same must be said as in old: ‘God’s judgments are abroad
in the world’; and it would much behove many of us to
know well that the essential fact lies there and not elsewhere.
If we ‘sin against God,’ it is most certain ‘God’s judgments’
will overtake us; and whether we recognise them as God’s
message like men, or merely rage and writhe under them like
dogs, and in our blind agony, each imputing it to his neigh-
bour, tear one another in pieces under them, it is certain they
will continue upon us, till we either cease ‘sinning,’ or are all
torn in pieces and annihilated.</p>
<p>Wide-spread suffering, mutiny and delirium; the hot rage
of sansculottic Insurrections, the cold rage of resuscitated
Tyrannies; the brutal degradation of the millions, the
pampered frivolity of the units; that awful unheeded spec-
tacle, ‘the Throne of Iniquity decreeing injustice by a law,’
as the just eye can see it everywhere doing:—certainly
something must be wrong in the inner man of the world,
since its outer man is so terribly out of square! The
deliverer of the world, therefore, were not he who headed
sansculottic insurrections never so successful, but he who
pointed out to the world what nightmares were resting over
its soul. Ignatius Loyola, and the innumerable company,
Papist, Protestant, Sham-christian, Anti-christian, that have
believed <em>his</em> revelation; universal prevalence, from pole to
pole, of such a ‘doctrine of devils’; reverent or quasi-
reverent faith in the dead human formulas, and somnolent
contempt of the divine ever-living facts, such as reigns now,
consecrated and supreme, in all commonwealths and countries,
and hearts of men; the Human Species, as it were, uncon-
sciously or consciously, gone all to one Sodality of Jesuitism:
who will deliver us from the body of this death! It is in
truth like death-in-life; a living-criminal (as in the old
Roman days) with a <em>corpse</em> lashed fast to him. What wretch
could have deserved such a doom? </p>
<hr/>
<p>As to this Ignatius, I am aware he is admired, and even
transcendently admired, or what we call worshipped, by multi-
tudes of human creatures, who to this day expect, or endeavour
to expect, some kind of salvation from him;—whom it is so
painful to enrage against me, if I could avoid it! Un-
doubtedly Ignatius, centuries ago, gave satisfaction to the
Devil’s Advocate, the Pope and other parties interested; was
canonised, named Saint, and raised duly into Heaven officially
so-called; whereupon, with many, he passes, ever since, for
a kind of God, or person who has much influence with the
gods.—Alas, the admiration, and transcendent admiration, of
mankind, goes a strange road in these times! Hudson too
had his canonisation: and by <i xml:lang="la">Vox Populi</i>, if not by Pope and
Devil’s Advocate, was raised to a kind of brass Olympus by
mankind; and rode there for a year or two;—though he is
already gone to warming-pans again. A poor man, in our
day, has many gods foisted on him; and big voices bid him,
”Worship, or be ⸻!” in a menacing and confusing
manner. What shall he do? By far the greater part of
said gods, current in the public, whether canonised by Pope
or Populus, are mere dumb Apises and beatified Prize-oxen;
—nay, some of them, who have articulate faculty, are devils
instead of gods. A poor man that would save his soul alive
is reduced to the sad necessity of sharply trying his gods
whether they are divine or not; which is a terrible pass for
mankind, and lays an awful problem upon each man. The
man must do it, however. At his own peril he will have to
do this problem too, which is one of the awfulest; and his
neighbours, all but a most select portion of them, portion
generally not clad in official tiaras, can be of next to no help
to him in it, nay, rather will infinitely hinder him in it, as
matters go. If Ignatius, worshipped by millions as a kind of
god, is, in eternal fact, a kind of devil, or enemy of whatsoever
is godlike in man’s existence, surely it is pressingly expedient
that men were made aware of it; that men, with whatever
earnestness is yet in them, laid it awfully to heart! </p>
<p>Prim friend with the black serge gown, with the rosary,
scapulary, and I know not what other spiritual block-and-
tackle,—scowl not on me. If in thy poor heart, under its
rosaries, there dwell any human piety, awestruck reverence
towards the Supreme Maker, devout compassion towards this
poor Earth and her sons,—scowl not anathema on me, listen
to me; for I swear thou art my brother, in spite of rosaries
and scapularies; and I recognise thee, though thou canst not
me; and with love and pity know thee for a brother, though
enchanted into the condition of a spiritual mummy. Hapless
creature, curse me not; listen to me, and consider;—perhaps
even thou wilt escape from mummyhood, and become once
more a living soul!</p>
<hr/>
<p>Of Ignatius, then, I must take leave to say, there can this
be recorded, that probably he has done more mischief in the
Earth than any man born since. A scandalous mortal, O
brethren of mankind who live by truth and not by falsity,
I must call this man. Altogether,—here where I stand, look-
ing on millions of poor pious brothers reduced to spiritual
mummyhood, who curse me because I try to speak the truth
to them, and on a whole world canting and grimacing from
birth to death, and finding in their life two serious indubita-
bilities, Cookery and Scrip,—how, if he is the representative
and chief fountain of all this, can I call him other than the
superlative of scandals? A bad man, I think; not good by
nature; and by destiny swollen into a very Ahriman of bad-
ness. Not good by nature, I perceive. A man born greedy;
whose greatness in the beginning, and even in the end if we
will look well, is indicated chiefly by the depth of his appe-
tite: not the recommendable kind of man! A man full of
prurient elements from the first; which at the last, through
his long course, have developed themselves over the family of
mankind into an expression altogether tremendous.</p>
<p>A young Spanish soldier and hidalgo with hot Biscayan
blood, distinguished, as I understand, by his fierce appetites
chiefly, by his audacities and sensualities, and loud unreason-
able decision, That this Universe, in spite of rumours to the
contrary, was a Cookery-shop and Bordel, wherein garlic,
Jamaica-pepper, unfortunate-females and other spicery and
garnishing awaited the bold human appetite, and the rest of
it was mere rumour and moonshine: with this life-theory and
practice had Ignatius lived some thirty years, a hot human
Papin’s-digester and little other; when, on the walls of Pam-
peluna, the destined cannon-shot shattered both his legs,—
leaving his head, hitting only his legs, so the Destinies would
have it,—and he fell at once totally prostrate, a wrecked
Papin’s-digester; lay many weeks horizontal, and had in that
tedious posture to commence a new series of reflections.
He began to perceive now that ‘the rest of it’ was not mere
rumour and moonshine; that the rest was, in fact, the whole
secret of the matter. That the Cookery-shop and Bordel
was a magical delusion, a sleight-of-hand of Satan, to lead
Ignatius down, by garlic and finer temporal spiceries, to
eternal Hell;—and that in short he, Ignatius, had lived
hitherto as a degraded ferocious Human Pig, one of the most
perfect scoundrels; and was, at that date, no other than a
blot on Creation, and a scandal to mankind.</p>
<p>With which set of reflections who could quarrel? The
reflections were true, were salutary; nay, there was something
of sacred in them,—as in the repentance of man, in the
discovery by erring man that wrong is not right, that wrong
differs from right as deep Hell from high Heaven, there ever
is. Ignatius’s soul was in convulsions, in agonies of new
birth; for which I honour Ignatius. Human sincerity could
not but have told him: “Yes, in several respects, thou art a
detestable Human Pig, and disgrace to the family of man;
for which it behoves thee to be in nameless remorse, till thy
life either mend or end. Consider, there as thou liest with
thy two legs smashed, the peccant element that is in thee;
discover it, rigorously tear it out; reflect what farther thou
wilt do. A life yet remains; to be led, clearly, in some new
manner: how wilt thou lead it? Sit silent for the rest of
thy days? In some most modest seclusion, hide thyself from
a humankind which has been dishonoured by thee? Thy sin
being pruriency of appetite, give that at least no farther
scope under any old or new form?”</p>
<p>I admit, the question was not easy. Think, in this his
wrecked horizontal position, what could or should the poor
individual called Inigo, Ignatius, or whatever the first name
of him was, have done? Truly for Ignatius the question
was very complicated. But, had he asked from Nature and
the eternal Oracles a remedy for wrecked sensualism, here
surely was one thing that would have suggested itself: To
annihilate his pruriency. To cower, silent and ashamed, into
some dim corner; and resolve to make henceforth as little
noise as possible. That would have been modest, salutary;
that might have led to many other virtues, and gradually to
all. That, I think, is what the small still voices would have
told Ignatius, could he have heard them amid the loud bully-
ings and liturgyings; but he couldn’t, perhaps he never
tried;—and <em>that</em>, accordingly, was not what Ignatius resolved
upon.</p>
<p>In fact, Christian doctrine, backed by all the human wisdom
I could ever hear of, inclines me to think that Ignatius, had
he been a good and brave man, should have consented, at
this point, to be damned,—as was clear to him that he
deserved to be. Here would have been a healing solace to
his conscience; one transcendent act of virtue which it still
lay with him, the worst of sinners, to do. “To die forever,
as I have deserved; let Eternal Justice triumph <em>so,</em> by means
of me and my foul scandals, since otherwise it may not!”
<i xml:lang="de">Selbsttödtung</i>, Annihilation of Self, justly reckoned the begin-
ning of all virtue: here is the highest form of it, still possible
to the lowest man. The voice of Nature this, to a repentant
outcast sinner turning again towards the realms of manhood;
—and I understand it is the precept of all right Christianity
too. But no, Ignatius could not, in his lowest abasement,
consent to have justice done on him, not on <em>him,</em> ah no;—
and there lay his crime and his misfortune, which has brought
such penalty on him and us.</p>
<p>The truth is, it was not of Eternal Nature and her Oracles
that Ignatius inquired, poor man; it was of Temporary Art
and <em>hers,</em> and these sang not of self-annihilation, or Ignatius
would not hear that part of their song. Not so did Ignatius
read the omens. “My pruriency being terribly forbidden on
one side, let it,” thought Ignatius, deeply unconscious of such
a thought, “have terrible course on another. Garlic-cookery
and suchlike excitations are accursed to me forever; but cannot
I achieve something that shall still assert my <i xml:lang="la">Ego</i> I in a
highly gratifying manner?” Alas, human sincerity, hard as
his scourging had been, was not quite attainable by him. In
his frantic just agonies, he flung himself before the shrine of
Virgin Marys, Saints of the Romish Calendar, three-hatted
Holy Fathers, and uncertain Thaumaturgic Entities; praying
that he might be healed by miracle, not by course of nature;
and that, for one most fatal item, his pruriency of appetite
might, under new inverse forms,—continue with him. Which
prayer, we may say, was granted.</p>
<p>In the depths of his despair, all Nature glooming veritable
reprobation on him, and Eternal Justice whispering, “<em>Accept</em>
what thou hast merited,” there rose this altogether turbid
semi-artificial glare of hope upon Ignatius, “The Virgin will
save me, the Virgin has saved me;”—Well and good, I say;
then be quiet, and let us see some temperance and modesty in
you. Far otherwise did Ignatius resolve: temperance and
true modesty were not among the gifts of this precious
individual the Virgin had been at the pains to save. Many
plans Ignatius tried to make his <i xml:lang="la">Ego</i> I still available on
Earth, and still keep Heaven open for him. His pilgrimings
and battlings, his silent sufferings and wrestlings for that object,
are enormous, and reach the highest pitch of the prurient-
heroic. At length, after various failures and unsatisfactory
half-successes, it struck him: “Has not there lately been a
sort of revolt against the Virgin, and the Holy Father who
takes care of her? Certain infernal Heresiarchs in Germany
and elsewhere, I am told, have risen up against the Holy
Father, arguing with terrible plausibility that he is an Unholy
Phantasm: he;—and if so, what am I and my outlooks! A
new light, presumably of Hell, has risen to that effect;
which new light—why cannot I vow here, and consecrate
myself, to battle against, and with my whole strength en-
deavour to extinguish?” That was the task Ignatius fixed
upon as his; and at that he has been busy, he and an im-
mense and ever-increasing sodality of mortals, these three
hundred years; and, through various fortune, they have
brought it thus far. Truly to one of the most singular pre-
dicaments the affairs of mankind ever stood in before.</p>
<p>If the new light is of Hell, O Ignatius, right: but if of
Heaven, there is not, that I know of, any equally damnable
sin as thine! No; thy late Pighood itself is trivial in com-
parison. Frantic mortal, wilt thou, at the bidding of any
Papa, war against Almighty God? Is there no ‘inspiration,’
then, but an ancient Jewish, Greekish, Romish one, with big
revenues, loud liturgies and red stockings? The Pope is old;
but Eternity, thou shalt observe, is older. High-treason
against all the Universe is dangerous to do. Quench not
among us, I advise thee, the monitions of that thrice-sacred
gospel, holier than all gospels, which dwells in each man
direct from the Maker of him! Frightfully will it be
avenged on thee, and on all that follow thee; to the sixth
generation and farther, all men shall lie under this gigantic
Upas-tree thou hast been planting; terribly will the gods
avenge it on thee, and on all thy Father Adam’s house!</p>
<hr/>
<p>Ignatius’s black militia, armed with this precious message
of salvation, have now been campaigning over all the world
for about three hundred years; and openly or secretly have
done a mighty work over all the world. Who can count
what a work! Where you meet a man believing in the
salutary nature of falsehoods, or the divine authority of things
doubtful, and fancying that to serve the Good Cause he must
call the Devil to his aid, there is a follower of Unsaint
Ignatius; not till the last of these men has vanished from
the Earth will our account with Ignatius be quite settled, and
his black militia have got their mittimus to Chaos again.
They have given a new substantive to modern languages.
The word ‘Jesuitism’ now, in all countries, expresses an idea
for which there was in Nature no prototype before. Not till
these late centuries had the human soul generated that
abomination, or needed to name it. Truly they have achieved
great things in the world; and a general result which we
may call stupendous. Not victory for Ignatius and the black
militia, no, till the Universe itself become a cunningly
devised Fable, and God the Maker abdicate in favour of
Beelzebub, I do not see how ‘victory’ can fall on that side!
But they have done such deadly execution on the general
soul of man; and have wrought such havoq, on the terrestrial
and supernal interests of this world, as insure to Jesuitism
a long memory in human annals.</p>
<p>How many three-hatted Papas, and scandalous Consecrated
Phantasms, cleric and laic, convicted or not yet suspected to
be Phantasms and servants of the Devil and not of God, does
it still retain in existence in all corners of this afflicted world!
Germany had its War of Thirty Years, among other wars, on
this subject; and had there not been elsewhere a nobler
loyalty to God’s Cause than was to be found in Germany at
that date, Ignatius with his rosaries and gibbet-ropes, with
his honey-mouthed Fathers Lammerlein in black serge, and
heavyfisted Fathers Wallenstein in chain armour, must have
carried it; and that alarming Lutheran new-light would have
been got extinguished again. The Continent once well
quenched out, it was calculated England might soon be made
to follow, and then the whole world were blessed with
orthodoxy. So it had been computed. But Gustavus, a
man prepared to die if needful, Gustavus with his Swedes
appeared upon the scene; nay, shortly Oliver Cromwell with
his Puritans appeared upon it; and the computation quite
broke down. Beyond seas and within seas, the Wallensteins
and Lämmerleins, the Hyacinths and Andreas Habernfelds,
the Lauds and Charleses,—in fine, Ignatius and all that held
of him,—had to cower into their holes again, and try it by
new methods. Many were their methods, their fortune
various; and ever and anon, to the hope or the terror of this
and the other man of weak judgment, it has seemed that
victory was just about to crown Ignatius. True, too true,
the execution done upon the soul of mankind has been
normous and tremendous; but victory to Ignatius there has
been none,—and will and can be none.</p>
<p>Nay, at last, ever since 1789 and ’93, the figure of the
quarrel has much altered; and the hope for Ignatius (except
to here and there a man of weak judgment) has become a
flat impossibility. For Luther and Protestantism Proper
having, so to speak, withdrawn from the battlefield, as
entities whose work was done, there then appeared on it Jean
Jacques and French Sansculottism; to which all creatures
have gradually joined themselves. Whereby now we have
Protestantism <em>Im</em>proper,—a Protestantism universal and
illimitable on the part of all men; the whole world risen
into anarchic mutiny, with pike and paving-stone; swearing
by Heaven above and also by Hell beneath, by the Eternal
Yea and the Eternal No, that Ignatius and Imposture shall
not rule them any more, neither in soul nor in body nor in
breeches-pocket any more; but that they will go unruled
rather,—as they hope it will be possible for them to do.
This is Ignatius’s ‘destruction’ of Protestantism: he has
destroyed it into Sansculottism, such a form of all-embracing
Protestantism as was never dreamt of by the human soul
before. So that now, at last, there is hope of final death
and rest to Ignatius and his labours. Ignatius, I perceive,
is now sure to die, and be abolished before long; nay, is
already dead, and will not even <em>galvanise</em> much farther; but,
in fine, is hourly sinking towards the Abyss,—dragging much
along with him thither. Whole worlds along with him:
such continents of things, once living and beautiful, now dead
and horrible; things once sacred, now not even commonly
profane:—fearful and wonderful, to every thinking heart and
seeing eye, in these days! That is the answer, slowly
enunciated, but irrevocable and indubitable, which Ignatius
gets in Heaven’s High Court, when he appeals there, asking,
”Am I a <i xml:lang="la">Sanctus</i> or not, as the Papa and his Devil’s-Advocate
told me I was?”</p>
<hr/>
<p>The ‘vivaciousness’ of Jesuitism is much spoken of, as a
thing creditable. And truly it is remarkable, though I
think in the way of wonder even more than of admiration,
what a quantity of killing it does require. To say nothing
of the Cromwells and Gustavuses, and what they did, they
and theirs,—it is near a century now since Pombal and
Aranda, secular and not divine men, yet useful antiseptic
products of their generation, felt called, if not consciously
by Heaven, then by Earth which is unconsciously a bit of
Heaven, to cut-down this scandal from the world, and make
the earth rid of Jesuitism for one thing. What a wide-
sweeping shear they gave it, as with the sudden scythe of
universal death, is well known; and how, mown down from
side to side of the world in one day, it had to lie sorrowfully
slain and withering under the sun. After all which, nay,
after 1793 itself, does not Jesuitism still pretend to be
alive, and in this year 1850, still (by dint of steady
galvanism) shows some quivering in its fingers and toes?
Vivacious, sure enough; and I suppose there must be reasons
for it, which it is well to note withal. But what if such
vivaciousness were, in good part, like that of evil weeds; if
the ‘strength’ of Jesuitism were like that of typhus-fever,
not a recommendable kind of strength!</p>
<p>I hear much also of ‘obedience,’ how that and the kindred
virtues are prescribed and exemplified by Jesuitism; the truth
of which, and the merit of which, far be it from me to deny.
Obedience, a virtue universally forgotten in these days, will
have to become universally known again. Obedience is good,
and indispensable: but if it be obedience to what is wrong
and false, good Heavens, there is no name for such a depth
of human cowardice and calamity; spurned everlastingly by
the gods. Loyalty? Will you be loyal to Beelzebub?
Will you ‘make a covenant with Death and Hell’? I will
not be loyal to Beelzebub; I will become a nomadic Chactaw
rather, a barricading Sansculotte, a Conciliation-Hall repealer;
anything and everything is venial to that.</p>
<p>The virtues of Jesuitism, seasoned with that fatal condiment,
are other than quite virtuous! To cherish pious thoughts,
and assiduously keep your eye directed to a Heaven that is
not real: will that yield divine life to you, or hideous galvanic
life-in-death? To cherish many quasi-human virtues, really
many possibilities of virtue; and wed them all to the
principle that God can be served by believing what is not
true: to put-out the sacred lamp of Intellect within you; to
decide on maiming yourself of that higher godlike gift, which
God himself has given you with a silent but awful charge
in regard to it; to be bullied and bowowed out of your
loyalty to the God of Light by big Phantasms and three-
hatted Chimeras: can I call that by the name of nobleness
or human courage?—“Could not help it,” say you? If “a
man cannot help it,” a man must allow me to say he has
unfortunately given the most conspicuous proof of caitiffhood
that lay within his human possibility, and he must cease to
brag to me about his ‘virtues,’ in that sad case!</p>
<hr/>
<p>But, in fact, the character of the poor creature named
Ignatius, whether it be good or bad and worst, concerns us
little; not even that of the specific Jesuit Body concerns us
much. The Jesuits proper have long since got their final
mittimus from England. Nor, in the seventeenth century,
—with an ubiquitous alarming Toby Mathews, Andreas
Habernfeld and Company; with there a Father Hyacinth,
and here a William Laud and Charles First,—was this by
any means so light a business as we now fancy. But it has
been got accomplished. Long now have the English People
understood that Jesuits proper, in so far as they are not
Nothing (which is the commonest case), are servants of the
Prince of Darkness: by Puritan Cromwelliads on the great
scale, and on the small by diligent hunting, confinement in
the Clink Prison, and judicial tribulation, let us say, by
earnest pious thought and fight, and the labours of the valiant
born to us, this country has been tolerably cleared of
Jesuits proper; nor is there danger of their ever coming to
a head here again. But, alas, the expulsion of the Jesuit
Body avails us little, when the Jesuit <em>Soul</em> has so nestled
itself in the life of mankind everywhere. What we have to
complain of is, that all men are become Jesuits! That no
man speaks the truth to you or to himself, but that every
man lies,—with blasphemous audacity, and does not know
that he is lying, before God and man, in regard to almost
all manner of things. This is the fell heritage bequeathed
us by Ignatius; to this sad stage has our battle with him
come.</p>
<p>Consider it, good reader;—and yet alas, if thou be not one
of a thousand, what is the use of bidding thee consider it!
The deadliest essence of the curse we now labour under is
that the light of our inner eyesight is gone out; that such
things are not discernible by considering. ‘Cant and even
sincere Cant’: O Heaven, when a man doing his sincerest is
still but canting! For this is the sad condition of the
insincere man: he is doomed all his days to deal with insin-
cerities; to live, move, and have his being in traditions and
conventionalities. If the traditions have grown old, the
conventionalities will be mostly false; true in no sense can
they be for him: never shall he behold the truth of any
matter; formulas, theologic, economic and other, certain
superficial readings of truth, required in the market-place,
these he will take with him, these he will apply dextrously,
and with these he will have to satisfy himself. Sincerity shall
not exist for him; he shall think that he has found it, while
it is yet far away. The deep, awful and indeed divine quality
of truth that lies in every object, and in virtue of which the
object exists,—from his poor eyes this is forever hidden.
Not with austere divine realities which belong to the Universe
and to Eternity, but with paltry ambiguous phantasms,
comfortable and uncomfortable, which belong to his own
parish, and to the current week or generation, shall he pass
his days.</p>
<p>There had been liars in the world; alas, never since the
Old Serpent tempted Eve, had the world been free of liars,
neither will it be: but there was in this of Jesuit Ignatius an
apotheosis of falsity, a kind of subtle quintessence and deadly
virus of lying, the like of which had never been seen before.
Measure it, if you can; prussic-acid and chloroform are poor
to it! Men had served the Devil, and men had very imper-
fectly served God; but to think that God could be served
more perfectly by taking the Devil into partnership,—this
was a novelty of St. Ignatius. And this is now no novelty;
to such extent has the Jesuit chloroform stupefied us all.
This is the universal faith and practice, for several genera-
tions past, of the class called good men in this world. They
are in general mutineers, sansculottes, angry disorderly persons,
and a class rather worthy to be called bad, who hitherto
assert the contrary of this. “Be careful how you believe
truth,” cries the good man everywhere: “Composure and a
whole skin are very valuable. Truth,—who knows?—many
things are not true; most things are uncertainties, very
prosperous things are even open falsities that have been
agreed upon. There is little certain truth going. If it isn’t
orthodox truth, it will play the very devil with you!”</p>
<p>Did the Human Species ever lie in such a soak of horrors,
—sunk like steeping flax under the wide-spread fetid Hell-
waters,—in all spiritual respects dead, dead; voiceless towards
Heaven for centuries back; merely sending up, in the form
of mute prayer, such an odour as the angels never smelt
before! It has to lie there, till the worthless part has been
rotted out; till much has been rotted out, I do perceive;—
and perhaps the time has come when the precious <em>lint fibre</em>
itself is in danger; and men, if they are not delivered, will
cease to be men, or to be at all! O Heavens, with divine
Hudson on this hand, and divine Ignatius on that, and the
Gorham Controversy going on, and the Irish Tenant Agita-
tion (which will soon become a Scotch and an English ditto)
just about beginning, is not the hour now nearly come?
Words fail us when we would speak of what Ignatius has
done for men. Probably the most virulent form of sin which
the Old Serpent has yet rejoiced in on our poor Earth. For
me it is the deadliest high treason against God our Maker
which the soul of man could commit.</p>
<p>And this, then, is the horrible conclusion we have arrived
at, in England as in all countries; and with <em>less</em> protest
against it hitherto, and not with more, in England than in
other countries? That the great body of orderly considerate
men; men affecting the name of good and pious, and who,
in fact, excluding certain silent exceptionary individuals one to
the million, such as the Almighty Beneficence never quite
withholds, are accounted our best men,—have unconsciously
abnegated the sacred privilege and duty of acting or speaking
the truth; and fancy that it is not truth that is to be acted,
but that an amalgam of truth and falsity is the safe thing.
In parliament and pulpit, in book and speech, in whatever
spiritual thing men have to commune of, or to do together,
this is the rule they have lapsed into, this is the pass they
have arrived at. We have to report that Human Speech is
not true! That it is false to a degree never witnessed in this
world till lately. Such a subtle virus of falsity in the very
essence of it, as far excels all open lying, or prior kinds of
falsity; false with consciousness of being sincere! The heart
of the world is corrupted to the core; a detestable devilV
poison circulates in the life-blood of mankind; taints with
abominable deadly malady all that mankind do. Such a
curse never fell on men before.</p>
<p>For the falsity of speech rests on a far deeper falsity.
False speech, as is inevitable when men long practise it, falsi-
fies all things; the very thoughts, or fountains of speech and
action become false. Ere long, by the appointed curse of
Heaven, a man’s intellect ceases to be capable of distinguish-
ing truth, when he permits himself to deal in speaking or
acting what is false. Watch well the tongue, for out of it
are the issues of life! O, the foul leprosy that heaps itself
in monstrous accumulation over Human Life, and obliterates
all the divine features of it into one hideous mountain of
purulent disease, when Human Life parts company with truth;
and fancies, taught by Ignatius or another, that lies will be
the salvation of it! We of these late centuries have suffered
as the sons of Adam never did before; hebetated, sunk under
mountains of torpid leprosy; and studying to persuade our-
selves that this is health.</p>
<p>And if we have awakened from the sleep of death into the
Sorcerer’s Sabbath of Anarchy, is it not the chief of blessings
that we are awake at all? Thanks to Transcendent Sanscu-
lottism and the long-memorable French Revolution, the one
veritable and tremendous Gospel of these bad ages, divine
Gospel such as we deserved, and merciful too, though preached
in thunder and terror! Napoleon Campaignings, September
Massacres, Reigns of Terror, Anacharsis Clootz and Pontiff
Robespierre, and still more beggarly tragicalities that we have
since seen, and are still to see: what frightful thing were not
a little less frightful than the thing we had? Peremptory
was our necessity of putting Jesuitism away, of awakening to
the consciousness of Jesuitism. ‘Horrible,’ yes: how could
it be other than horrible? Like the valley of Jehoshaphat,
it lies round us, one nightmare wilderness, and wreck of dead-
men’s bones, this false modern world; and no rapt Ezekiel in
prophetic vision imaged to himself things sadder, more horrible
and terrible, than the eyes of men, if they <em>are</em> awake, may
now deliberately see. Many yet sleep; but the sleep of all,
as we judge by their maundering and jargoning, their Gorham
Controversies, street-barricadings, and uneasy tossings and
somnambulisms, is not far from ending. Novalis says, ‘We
are near awakening when we <em>dream that we are dreaming</em>.’</p>
<hr/>
<p>A man’s ‘religion’ consists not of the many things he is in
doubt of and tries to believe, but of the few he is assured of,
and has no need of effort for believing. His religion, what-
ever it may be, is a discerned fact, and coherent system of
discerned facts to him; he stands fronting the worlds and the
eternities upon it: to <em>doubt</em> of it is not permissible at all! He
must verify or expel his doubts, convert them into certainty
of Yes or No; or they will be the death of his religion.—But,
on the other hand, convert them into certainty of Yes <em>and</em> No;
or even of Yes <em>though</em> No, as the Ignatian method is, what
will become of your religion? Let us glance a little at this
strange aspect of our affairs.</p>
<hr/>
<p>What a man’s or nation’s available religion at any time is,
may sometimes, especially if he abound in Bishops, Gorham
Controversies, and richly endowed Churches and Church-prac-
tices, be difficult to say. For a Nation which, under very
peculiar circumstances, closed its Bible about two hundred
years ago, hanged the dead body of its Cromwell, and accepted
one Charles Second for Defender of its <em>Faith</em> so-called; for
such a Nation, which has closed its Bible, and decided that
the sufficient and much handier practice would be to kiss the
outside of said Bible, and in all senses swear zealously, by
the same without opening it again, the question what its
’religion’ is, may naturally be involved in obscurities! Such
dramaturgic fugle- worship going on everywhere, and kissing
of the closed Bible, what real worship <em>religion,</em> or recog-
nition of a Divine Necessity in Nature and Life, there may
be—Or, in fact, is there any left at all? Very little, I
should say.</p>
<p>The religion of a man in these strange circumstances, what
living conviction he has about his Destiny in this Universe,
falls into a most strange condition;—and, in truth, I have
observed, is apt to take refuge in the stomach mainly. The
man goes through his prescribed fugle-motions at church and
elsewhere, keeping his conscience and sense of decency at ease
thereby; and in some empty part of his brain, if he have
fancy left, or brain other than a beaver’s, there goes on
occasionally some dance of dreamy hypotheses, sentimental
echoes, shadows, and other inane make-believes,—which I
think are quite the contrary of a possession to him; leading
to no clear Faith, or divine life-and-death Certainty of any
kind; but to a torpid species of <i xml:lang="la">delirium somniam</i> and
<i xml:lang="la">delirium stertens</i> rather. In his head or in his heart this
man has of available religion none. But descend into his
stomach, puree and the adjacent regions, you then do awaken,
even in the very last extremity, a set of divine beliefs, were
it only belief in the multiplication-table, and certain coarser
outward forms of <i xml:lang="la">meum</i> and <i xml:lang="la">tuum</i>. He believes in the
inalienable nature of purchased beef, in the duty of the
British citizen to fight for himself when injured, and other
similar faiths:—an actual ‘religion’ of its sort, or revelation
of what the Almighty Maker means with him in this Earth,
and has irrefragably, as by direct inspiration, charged him
to do. This is the man’s religion; <em>this</em> poor scantling of
‘divine convictions’ which you find lying, mostly inarticulate,
in deep sleep at the bottom of his stomach, and have such
difficulty in raising into any kind of elocution or conscious
wakefulness.</p>
<p>Alas, so much of him, his soul almost wholly, is not only
asleep there, but gone drowned and dead. The ‘religion’ you
awaken in him is often of a very singular quality; enough to
make the observer pause in silence. Such a religion, issuing
practically in Hudson Statues, and, alas, also in Distressed
Needlewomen, Cannibal Connaughts, and ‘remedial measures
suited to the occasion,’ was never seen among Adam’s Pos-
terity before. But it is this modern man’s religion; all the
religion you will get of him. And if you can winnow-out
the fugle-motions, fantasies, sentimentalisms, make-believes,
and other multitudinous chaff, so that his religion stands
before you in its net condition, you may contemplate it with
scientific astonishment, with innumerable reflections, and may
perhaps draw wise inferences from it.</p>
<p>A singular piece of scribble, in Sauerteig’s hand, bearing
marks of haste and almost of rage (for the words, abbreviated
to the bone, tumble about as if in battle on the paper), occurs
to me at this moment, entitled <i xml:lang="de" epub:type="z3998:fiction se:name.publication.pamphlet">Schwein’sche Weltansicht</i>; and
I will try to decipher and translate it.</p>

<blockquote epub:type="z3998:fiction">
<h3>Pig Philosophy</h3>

<p>If the inestimable talent of Literature should, in these
swift days of progress, be extended to the brute creation,
having fairly taken-in all the human, so that swine and oxen
could communicate to us on paper what they thought of the
Universe, there might curious results, not uninstructive to
some of us, ensue. Supposing swine (I mean fourfooted
swine), of sensibility and superior logical parts, had attained
such culture; and could, after survey and reflection, jot-down
for us their notion of the Universe, and of their interests and
duties there,—might it not well interest a discerning public,
perhaps in unexpected ways, and give a stimulus to the
languishing book-trade? The votes of all creatures, it is
understood at present, ought to be had; that you may
”legislate” for them with better insight. “How can you
govern a thing,” say many, “without first asking its vote?”
Unless, indeed, you already chance to know its vote,—and
even something more, namely, what you are to think of its
vote; what it wants by its vote; and still more important,
what Nature wants, which latter, at the end of the account,
is the only thing that will be got!—Pig Propositions, in
a rough form, are somewhat as follows:</p>

<ol>
    <li>
<p>The Universe, so far as sane conjecture can go, is an
immeasurable SwineVtrough, consisting of solid and liquid,
and of other contrasts and kinds;—especially consisting of
attainable and unattainable, the latter in immensely greater
quantities for most pigs.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
<p>Moral evil is unattainability of Pig’s-wash; moral
good, attainability of ditto.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
<p>“What is Paradise, or the State of Innocence?”
Paradise, called also State of Innocence, Age of Gold, and
other names, <em>was</em> (according to Pigs of weak judgment)
unlimited attainability of Pig’s-wash; perfect fulfilment of
one’s wishes, so that the Pig’s imagination could not outrun
reality: a fable and an impossibility, as Pigs of sense
now see.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
        <p>“Define the Whole Duty of Pigs.” It is the mission
of universal Pighood, and the duty of all Pigs, at all times,
to diminish the quantity of unattainable and increase that
of attainable. All knowledge and device and effort ought
to be directed thither and thither only; Pig Science, Pig
Enthusiasm and Devotion have this one aim. It is the
Whole Duty of Pigs.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
        <p>Pig Poetry ought to consist of universal recognition
of the excellence of Pig’s-wash and ground barley, and the
felicity of Pigs whose trough is in order, and who have had
enough: Hrumph!</p>
    </li>
    <li>
        <p>The Pig knows the weather; he ought to look out
what kind of weather it will be.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
<p>“Who made the Pig?” Unknown;—perhaps the
Pork-butcher?</p>
    </li>
    <li>
        <p>“Have you Law and Justice in Pigdom?” Pigs of
observation have discerned that there is, or was once supposed
to be, a thing called justice. Undeniably at least there is
a sentiment in Pig-nature called indignation, revenge, etc.,
which, if one Pig provoke another, comes out in a more or
less destructive manner: hence laws are necessary, amazing
quantities of laws. For quarrelling is attended with loss of
blood, of life, at any rate with frightful effusion of the general
stock of Hog’s-wash, and ruin (temporary ruin) to large
sections of the universal Swine’s-trough: wherefore let justice
be observed, that so quarrelling be avoided.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
<p>“What is justice?” Your own share of the general
Swine’s-trough, not any portion of my share.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
        <p>“But what is ‘my’ share?” Ah! there in fact lies
the grand difficulty; upon which Pig science, meditating this
long while, can settle absolutely nothing. My share—hrumph!
—my share is, on the whole, whatever I can contrive to
get without being hanged or sent to the hulks. For there
are gibbets, treadmills, I need not tell you, and rules which
Lawyers have prescribed.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
        <p>“Who are Lawyers?” Servants of God, appointed
revealers of the oracles of God, who read-off to us from day
to day what is the eternal Commandment of God in reference
to the mutual claims of his creatures in this world.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
        <p>“Where do they find that written?” In Coke upon
        Lyttelton.</p>
    </li>
    <li>
        <p>“Who made Coke?” Unknown: the maker of
Coke’s wig is discoverable.—“What became of Coke?”
Died.—“And then?” Went to the undertaker; went to
the—’</p>
    </li>
</ol>
</blockquote>
<p>But we must pull up: Sauerteig’s fierce humour,
confounding ever farther in his haste the fourfooted with the
twofooted animal, rushes into wilder and wilder forms of
satirical torch-dancing, and threatens to end in a universal
Rape of the Wigs, which in a person of his character looks
ominous and dangerous. Here, for example, is his fifty-first
’Proposition,’ as he calls it:</p>
<blockquote>
    <ol>
        <li value="51">
            <p>“What are Bishops?” Overseers of souls.—“What
is a soul?” The thing that keeps the body alive.—“How
do they oversee that?” They tie on a kind of aprons,
publish charges; I believe they pray dreadfully; macerate
themselves nearly dead with continual grief that they cannot
in the least oversee it.—“And are much honoured?” By
the wise very much.</p>
        </li>
        <li>
            <p>“Define the Church.” I had rather not.—“Do you
believe in a Future state?” Yes, surely.—“What is it?”
Heaven, so-called.—“To everybody?” I understand so;
hope so!—“What is it thought to be?” Hrumph!—“No
Hell, then, at all?”—Hrumph!’</p>
        </li>
    </ol>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<p>The Fine Arts are by some thought to be a kind of
religion; the chief religion this poor Europe is to have in
time coming: and undoubtedly it is in Literature, Poetry
and the other kindred Arts, where at least a certain manli-
ness of temper, and liberty to follow truth, prevails or might
prevail, that the world’s chosen souls do now chiefly take
refuge, and attempt what ‘Worship of the Beautiful’ may
still be possible for them. The Poet in the Fine Arts,
especially the Poet in Speech, what Fichte calls the ‘Scholar’
or the ‘Literary Man,’ is defined by Fichte as the ‘Priest’ of
these Modern Epochs,—all the Priest they have. And
indeed Nature herself will teach us that the man born with
what we call ‘genius,’ which will mean, born with better and
larger understanding than others; the man in whom ‘the
inspiration of the Almighty,’ given to all men, has a higher
potentiality;—that he, and properly he only, is the per-
petual Priest of Men; ordained to the office by God himself,
whether men can be so lucky as to get him ordained to it or
not: nay, he does the office, too, after a sort, in this and in
all epochs. Ever must the Fine Arts be if not religion, yet
indissolubly united to it, dependent on it, vitally blended with
it as body is with soul.</p>
<p>Why should I say, Ignatius Loyola ruined our Fine Arts?
Ignatius thought not of the Fine Arts; nor is the guilt all
his. Ignatius, intent on the heart of the matter, did but
consecrate in the name of Heaven, and religiously welcome as
life in God, the universal death in the Devil which of itself
was preparing to come,—on the Fine Arts as on all things.
The Fine Arts are not what I most regret in the catastrophe
so frightfully accelerated and consummated by him! If men’s
practical faith have become a Pig Philosophy, and their divine
worship have become a Mumbojumboism, soliciting in dumb
agony either change to the very heart or else extinction and
abolition, it matters little what their fine or other arts may
be. All arts, industries and pursuits they have, are tainted
to the heart with foul poison; carry not in them the inspir-
ation of God, but (frightful to think of!) that of the Devil
calling and thinking himself God; and are smitten with a
curse forevermore. What judgment the Academy of Cogno-
scenti may pronounce on them, is unimportant to me; what
splendour of upholstery and French cookery, and temporary
bullion at the Bank, may be realised from them, is important
to M’Croudy, not to me.</p>
<p>Such bullion, I perceive well, can but be temporary;—and
if it were to be eternal, would bullion reconcile me to them?
No, M’Croudy, never. Bullion, temporary bullion itself,
awakens the hallelujah of flunkies; but even eternal bullion
ought to make small impression upon men. To men I count
it a human blessedness, and stern benignity of Heaven, that
when their course is false and ignoble, their bullion begins to
leave them; that ultimate bankruptcy, and flat universal ruin,
published in the gazette, and palpable even to flunkies, follows
step by step, at a longer or shorter interval, all solecisms
under this sun. Certain as shadow follows substance; it is
the oldest law of Fate:—and one good day, open ruin, bank-
ruptcy and foul destruction, does overtake them all. Let
us bless God for it. Were it otherwise, what end could there
be of solecisms? The temporary paradise of quacks and
flunkies were now an eternal paradise; how could the noble
soul find harbour or patience in this world at all? This
world were the inheritance of the ignoble;—a very Bedlam,
as some sceptics have fancied it; made by malignant gods in
their sport.</p>
<p>But as to Jesuitism in the Fine Arts, and how its unsus-
pected thrice-unblessed presence here too smites the genius of
mankind with paralysis, there were much to be said. Sorrow-
ful reflections lie in that, far beyond what a discerning
public fancies in these days; reflections which cannot be
entered upon, which can hardly be indicated afar off, at
present. Here too, as elsewhere, the consummate flower of
Consecrated Unveracity reigns supreme; and here as else-
where peaceably presides over an enormous Life-in-Death!</p>
<hr/>
<p>“May the Devil fly away with the Fine Arts!” exclaimed
confidentially once, in my hearing, one of our most distin-
guished public men; a sentiment that often recurs to me. I
perceive too well how true it is, in our case. A public man,
intent on any real business, does, I suppose, find the Fine
Arts rather imaginary. The Fine Arts, wherever they turn-
up as business, whatever Committee sit upon them, are sure
to be the parent of much empty talk, laborious hypocrisy,
dilettantism, futility; involving huge trouble and expense
and babble, which end in no result, if not in worse than none.
The practical man, in his moments of sincerity, feels them to
be a pretentious nothingness; a confused superfluity and
nuisance, purchased with cost,—what he in brief language
denominates a <em>bore</em>. It is truly so, in these degraded days:
—and the Fine Arts, among other fine interests of ours, are
really called to recognise it, and see what they will do in it.
For they are become the Throne of Hypocrisy, I think the
highest of her many thrones, these said Arts; which is very
sad to consider! Nowhere, not even on a gala-day in the
Pope’s Church of St. Peter, is there such an explosion of in-
tolerable hypocrisy, on the part of poor mankind, as when you
admit them into their Royal Picture-gallery, Glyptothek,
Museum, or other divine Temple of the Fine Arts. Hypocrisy
doubly intolerable; because it is not here, as in St. Peter’s
and some other Churches, an obliged hypocrisy but a voluntary
one. Nothing but your own vanity prompts you here to
pretend worshipping; you are not bound to worship, and
twaddle pretended raptures, criticisms and poetic recognitions,
unless you like it;—and you do not the least know what a
damnable practice it is, or you wouldn’t! I make a rule,
these many years back, to speak almost nothing, and en-
courage no speech in Picture-galleries; to avoid company,
even that of familiar friends, in such situations; and per-
ambulate the place in silence. You can thus worship or not
worship, precisely as the gods bid you; and are at least under
no obligation to do hypocrisies, if you cannot conveniently
worship.</p>
<p>The fact is, though men are not in the least aware of it,
the Fine Arts, divorced entirely from Truth this long while,
and wedded almost professedly to Falsehood, Fiction and
suchlike, are got into what we must call an insane condition:
they walk abroad without keepers, nobody suspecting their
sad state, and do fantastic tricks equal to any in Bedlam,—
especially when admitted to work ‘regardless of expense,’
as we sometimes see them! What earnest soul passes that
new St. Stephen’s, and its wilderness of stone pepperboxes
with their tin flags atop, worth two millions I am told,
without mentally exclaiming <i xml:lang="grc">Apagè</i>, and cutting some pious
cross in the air! If that be ‘ideal beauty,’ except for
sugarwork, and the more elaborate kinds of gingerbread,
what is real ugliness? To say merely (with an architectonic
trumpet-blast that cost two-millions), “Good Christians, you
observe well I am regardless of expense, and also of veracity,
in every form?” Too truly these poor Fine Arts have
fallen mad!</p>
<p>The Fine Arts once divorcing themselves from <em>truth</em>, are
quite certain to fall mad, if they do not die, and get flown
away with by the Devil, which latter is only the second-worst
result for us. Truth, fact, is the life of all things; falsity,
’fiction’ or whatever it may call itself, is certain to be death,
and is already insanity, to whatever thing takes up with it.
Fiction, even to the Fine Arts, is not a quite permissible
thing. Sparingly permissible, within iron limits; or if you
will reckon strictly, not permissible at all! The Fine Arts
too, like the coarse and every art of Man’s god-given Faculty,
are to understand that they are sent hither not to fib and
dance, but to speak and work; and, on the whole, that God
Almighty’s <em>Facts</em>, such as given us, are the one pabulum
which will yield them any nourishment in this world. O
Heavens, had they always well remembered that, what a world
were it now!</p>
<p>This seems strange doctrine: but it is to me, this long
while, too sorrowfully certain; and I invite all my artist
friends, of the painting, sculpturing, speaking, writing,
especially of the singing and rhyming department, to medi-
tate upon it, till, with amazement, remorse, and determination
to amend, they get to see what lies in it! Homer’s Iliad, if
you examine, is no Fiction but a Ballad <em>History</em>; the heart
of it burning with enthusiastic ill-informed <em>belief</em>. It ‘sings’
itself, because its rude heart, rapt into transcendency of
zeal and admiration, is too full for speaking. The ‘valour
of Tydides,’ ‘wrath of the divine Achilles’: in old Greece,
in Phthiotis and Ætolia, to earnest souls that could <em>believe</em>
them, these things were likely to be interesting! Human
speech was once wholly true; as transcendent human speech
still is. The Hebrew Bible, is it not, before all things, <em>true</em>,
as no other Book ever was or will be? All great Poems, all
great Books, if you search the first foundation of their
greatness, have been veridical, the truest they could get to be.
Never will there be a great Poem more that is not veridical,
that does not ground itself on the Interpreting of Fact; to
the rigorous exclusion of all falsity, fiction, idle dross of
every kind: never can a Poem truly interest human souls,
except by, in the first place, taking with it the <em>belief</em> of said
souls. Their belief; that is the whole basis, essence, and
practical outcome, of human souls: leave that behind you, as
‘Poets’ everywhere have for a long time done, what is there
left the Poets and you!</p>
<hr/>
<p>The early Nations of the world, all Nations so long as
they continued simple and in earnest, knew without teaching
that their History was an Epic and Bible, the clouded
struggling Image of a God’s Presence, the action of heroes
and god-inspired men. The noble intellect that could dis-
enthral such divine image, and present it to them clear, un-
clouded, in visible coherency comprehensible to human thought,
was felt to be a <i xml:lang="la">Vates</i> and the chief of intellects. No need
to bid him sing it, make a Poem of it. Nature herself com-
pelled him; except in Song or in Psalm, such an insight by
human eyes into the divine was not utterable. These are
the Bibles of Nations; to each its Believed History is its
Bible. Not in Judea alone, or Hellas and Latium alone;
but in all lands and all times. Nor, deeply as the fact is
now forgotten, has it essentially in the smallest degree ceased
to be the fact, nor will it cease. With every Nation it is
so, and with every man;—for every Nation, I suppose, was
made by God, and every man too? Only there are some
Nations, like some men, who know it; and some who do not,
The great Nations are they that have known it well; the
small and contemptible, both of men and Nations, are they
that have either never known it, or soon forgotten it and
never laid it to heart. Of these comes nothing. The
measure of a Nation’s greatness, of its worth under this sky
to God and to men, is not the quantity of cotton it can spin,
the quantity of bullion it has realised; but the quantity of
heroisms it has achieved, of noble pieties and valiant wisdoms
that were in it,—that still are in it.</p>
<p>Beyond doubt the Almighty Maker made this England
too; and has been and forever is miraculously present here.
The more is the pity for us if our eyes are grown owlish, and
cannot see this fact of facts when it is before us! Once it
was known that the Highest did of a surety dwell in this
Nation, divinely avenging, and divinely saving and rewarding;
leading, by steep and flaming paths, by heroisms, pieties
and noble acts and thoughts, this Nation heavenward, if it
would and dared. Known or not, this (or else the terrible
<em>inverse</em> of this) is forevermore the fact! The History of
England too, had the Fine or other Arts taught us to read
it right, is the record of the Divine Appearances among us;
of the brightnesses out of Heaven that have irradiated our
terrestrial struggle; and spanned our wild deluges, and
weltering seas of trouble, as with celestial rainbows, and
symbols of eternal covenants. It is the <em>Bible</em> of the Nation:
what part of it they have laid to heart, and do practically
know for truth, is the available Bible they have.</p>
<p>Ask yourselves, What are the eternal covenants which you
can believe, and dare not for your life’s sake but go and
observe? These are your Bible, <em>your</em> God’s Word such as it
may be: these you will continually struggle to obey; other
than these, not continually, or authentically at all. Did the
Maker of this Universe reveal himself, to your believing
Intellect, in scrip mainly, in Cotton Trades, and profitable
industries and gamblings? Here too you will see ‘miracles’:
tubular bridges, gutta-percha telegraphs; not to speak of
sudden Hudson cornucopias, scrip manna-showers, and pillar-
of-cloud for all the flunkies,—miracles after a sort. Your
Bible will be a Political Economy; your psalmist and
evangelist will be M’Croudy; your practical worship the
insatiable desire, and continual sacred effort, to make money.
Bible, of one or the other sort, bible, evangelist, and worship
you infallibly will have:—and some are God-worships, fruit-
ful in human heroisms, in blessed arts, and deeds long-
memorable, shining with a sacred splendour of the empyrean
across all earthly darknesses and contradictions: and some
again are, to a terrible extent, Devil-worships, fruitful in
temporary bullion, in upholstery, gluttony and universal
varnish and gold-leaf; and issuing, alas, at length in street-
barricades, and a confused <em>return</em> of them to the Devil whose
they are!—My friend, I have to speak in crude language, the
wretched times being dumb and deaf: and if thou find no
truth under this but the phantom of an extinct Hebrew one,
I at present cannot help it.</p>
<p>Hengst Invasions, Norman Conquests, Battles of Brunan-
burg, Battles of Evesham, Towton; Plantagenets, Wars of
Roses, Wars of Roundheads: does the fool in his heart
believe that all this was a Donnybrook Bedlam, originating
nowhere, proceeding nowhither? His beautifully cultivated
intellect has given him such interpretation, and no better, of
the Universe we live in? He discerns it to be an enormous
sooty Weaving-shop, and turbid Manufactory of eatables and
drinkables and wearables; sparingly supplied with provender
by the industrious individuals, and much infested by the mad
and idle. And he can consent to live here; he does not
continually think of suicide as a remedy? The unhappy
mortal: if a soul ever awaken in him again, his first thought
will be of prussic-acid, I should say!—</p>
<p>All History, whether M’Croudy and his Fine Arts know
the fact or not, is an inarticulate Bible; and in a dim
intricate manner reveals the Divine Appearances in this lower
world. For God did make this world, and does forever
govern it; the loud-roaring Loom of Time, with all its
French revolutions, Jewish revelations, ‘weaves the vesture
thou seest Him by,’ There is no Biography of a man, much
less any History, or Biography of a Nation, but wraps in it a
message out of Heaven, addressed to the hearing ear or to
the not-hearing. What this Universe is, what the Laws of
God are, the Life of every man will a little teach it you; the
Life of All Men and of All Things, only this could wholly
teach it you,—and you are to be open to learn.</p>
<p>Who are they, gifted from above, that will convert volu-
minous Dryasdust into an Epic and even a Bible? Who
will smelt, in the all-victorious fire of his soul, these
scandalous bewildering rubbish-mountains of sleepy Dryasdust,
till they give-up the golden ingot that lies imprisoned in
them? The veritable ‘revelation,’ this, of the ways of God
to England; how the Almighty Power, and his mysterious
Providences, dealt heretofore with England; more and more
what the Almighty’s judgments with us, his chastisements
and his beneficences, were; what the Supreme Will, since
ushering this English People on the stage of things, has
guided them to do and to become. Fine Arts, Literatures,
Poetries? If they are Human Arts at all, where have they
been wool-gathering, these centuries long;—wandering liter-
ally like creatures fallen mad!</p>
<p>It awakens graver thoughts than were in Marlborough,
that saying of his, That he knew no English History but
what he had learned from Shakspeare. In Shakspeare^s grand
intelligence the History of England, cursory as was his study
of it, does model itself, for the first time, into something of
rhythmic and poetic; there are scattered traits and tones of
a National Epos in those Historical Plays of his. In Shak-
speare, more than in another, lay that high <i xml:lang="la">vates</i> talent of
interpreting confused human Actualities, and unfolding what
divine melodious Ideals, or Thoughts of the Supreme, were
embodied in them: he, more than any other, might have done
somewhat towards making History a Bible. But, alas, it was
not in the Temple of the Nations, with all intelligences
ministering to him and cooperating with him, that his work-
shop was laid; it was in the Bankside Playhouse that Shak-
speare was set to work, and the sovereign populace had ware
for their sixpence from him there!—</p>
<hr/>
<p>After all, I do not blame the poor Fine Arts for taking
into fiction, and into all the deeper kinds of falsity which
grow from that. Ignatius, and a world too ready to follow
him, had discovered the divine virtues of <em>fiction</em> in far higher
provinces; the road to fiction lay wide-open for all things!
But Nature’s eternal voice, inaudible at present or faintly
audible, proclaims the contrary nevertheless; and will make
it known again one day. Fiction, I think, or idle falsity of
any kind, was never tolerable, except in a world which did
itself abound in practical lies and solemn shams; and which
had gradually impressed on its inhabitants the inane form of
character tolerant of that kind of ware. A serious soul, can
it wish, even in hours of relaxation, that you should fiddle
empty nonsense to it? A serious soul would desire to be
entertained, either with absolute silence, or with what was
truth, and had fruit in it, and was made by the Maker of us
all. With the idle soul I can fancy it far otherwise; but
only with the idle.</p>
<p>Given an idle potentate, monster of opulence, gluttonous
bloated Nawaub, of black colour or of white,—naturally he
will have prating story-tellers to amuse his half-sleepy hours
of rumination; if from his deep gross stomach, sinking over-
loaded as if towards its last torpor, they can elicit any
transient glow of interest, tragic or comic, especially any
wrinkle of momentary laughter, however idle, great shall be
their reward. Wits, story-tellers, ballad-singers, especially
dancing-girls who understand their trade, are in much request
with such gluttonous half-sleeping, black or white Monster of
Opulence. A bevy of supple dancing-girls who with the due
mixture (mixture settled by custom), and with not more than
the due mixture, of lascivious fire, will represent to him,
brandishing their daggers, and rhythmically chanting and
posturing, the Loves of Vishnu, Loves of Adonis, Death of
Psyche, Barber of Seville, or whatever nonsense there may be,
according to time or country: these are the kind of artists
fit for such unfortunate stuffed stupefied Nawaub, in his hours
of rumination; upon these his hot heavy-laden eye may rest
without abhorrence; if with perceptible momentary satis-
faction emerging from his bottomless ennui,—then victory
and gold-purses to the artist; be such artist crowned with
laurel or with parsley, and declared divine in presence of all
men.</p>
<p>Luxurious Europe, in its reading publics, dilettanti, cog-
noscenti and other publics, is wholly one big ugly Nawaub of
that kind; who has converted all the Fine Arts into after-
dinner amusements; slave adjuncts to his cookeries, uphol-
steries, tailories, and other palpably Coarse Arts. The
brutish monster has turned all the Nine Muses, who by birth
are sacred Priestesses of Heaven, into scandalous Bayaderes;
and they dance with supple motions, to enlighten the vile
darkness of his ennui for him. Too truly <em>mad</em>, these poor
Fine Arts! The Coarse Arts too, if he had not an authentic
stomach and skin, which always bring him a little right again
in those departments, would go mad.</p>
<hr/>
<p>How all things hang together! Universal Jesuitism having
once lodged itself in the heart, you will see it in the very
finger-nails by and by. Calculate how far it is from Sophocles
and Æschylus to Knowles and Scribe; how Homer has
gradually changed into Sir Harris Nicolas; or what roads the
human species must have travelled before a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Psalm of David</i>
could become an <i epub:type="se:name.publication.opera">Opera at the Haymarket</i>, and men, with
their divine gift of Music, instead of solemnly celebrating the
highest fact, or ‘singing to the praise of God,’ consented to
celebrate the lowest nonsense, and sing to the praise of Jenny
Lind and the Gazza Ladra,—perhaps the step from Oliver
Cromwell to Lord John Russell will not seem so uncon-
scionable! I find it within, and not without, the order of
Nature; and that all things, like all men, are blood-relations
to one another.</p>
<p>This accursed nightmare, which we name Jesuitism, will
have to vanish; our comfort is, that life itself is not much
longer possible otherwise. But I say, have you computed
what a distance forwards it may be towards some <em>new</em> Psalm
of David done with our new appliances, ard much improved
wind-instruments, grammatical and other? That is the dis-
tance of the new Golden Age, my friend; not less than that,
I lament to say! And the centuries that intervene are a
foul agonistic welter through the Stygian seas of mud: a long
<em>Scavenger Age</em>, inevitable where the Mother of Abominations
has long dwelt.</p>
<hr/>
<p>It is to be hoped one is not blind withal to the celebrated
virtues that are in Jesuitism; to its missionary zeal, its con-
tempt of danger, its scientific, heroic and other prowesses, of
which there is such celebrating. I do not doubt that there
are virtues in it; that we and it, along with this immeasur-
able sea of miseries which it has brought upon us, shall
ultimately get the benefit of its virtues too. Peruvian bark,
of use in human agues; tidings from the fabulous East by
D’Herbelot, Du Halde, and others; examples of what human
energy and faculty are equal to, even under the inspiration of
Ignatius: nothing of this small residue of pearls from such
a continent of putrid shellfish, shall be lost to the world.
Nay, I see, across this black deluge of Consecrated Falsity,
the world ripening towards glorious new developments, un~
imagined hitherto,—of which this abominable mud deluge
itself, threatening to submerge us all, was the inevitable
precursor, and the means decreed by the Eternal. If it please
Heaven, we shall all yet make our <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Exodus</i> from Houndsditch,
and bid the sordid continents, of once rich apparel now
grown poisonous <i xml:lang="fr">Ou’-clo’</i> a mild farewell! Exodus into
wider horizons, into God’s daylight once more; where eternal
skies, measuring <em>more</em> than three ells, shall again overarch
us; and men, immeasurably richer for having dwelt among
the Hebrews, shall pursue their <em>human</em> pilgrimage, St.
Ignatius and much other saintship, and superstitious terror
and lumber, lying safe behind us, like the nightmares of a
sleep that is past!—</p>
<p>I said the virtue of obedience was not to be found except
among the Jesuits: how, in fact, among the <em>Anti</em>-Jesuits,
still in a revolutionary posture in this world, can you expect
it? Sansculottism is a rebel; has its birth, and being, in
open mutiny; and cannot give you examples of obedience.
It is so with several other virtues and cardinal virtues; they
seem to have vanished from the world;—and I often say to
myself, Jesuitism and other Superstitious Scandals cannot go,
till we have read and appropriated from them the tradition
of these lost noblenesses, and once more under the new con-
ditions made them ours. Jesuitism, the Papa with his three
hats, and whole continents of chimerical lumber will then
go; their errand being wholly done. We cannot make our
Exodus from Houndsditch till we have got our own along
with us! The Jew old-clothes having now grown fairly
pestilential, a poisonous incumbrance in the path of men,
burn them up with revolutionary fire, as you like and can:
even so,—but you shall not quit the place till you have
gathered from their ashes what of gold or other enduring
metal was sewed upon them, or woven in the tissue of them.
That is the appointed course of human things.</p>
<p>Here are two excerpts from the celebrated Gathercoal, a
Yankee friend of mine; which flash strangely a kind of torch-
gleam into the hidden depths; and indicate to us the grave
and womb of Jesuitism, and of several other things:</p>
<p>‘Moses and the Jews did not <em>make</em> God’s Laws,’ exclaims
he; ‘no, by no means; they did not even read them in a
way that has been final, or is satisfactory to me! In several
important respects I find said reading decidedly bad; and
will not, in any wise, think of adopting it. How dare I,
think you?—And yet, alas, if we forget to read these Laws
at all; if we go along as if they were not there!</p>
<p>‘My enlightened friends of this present supreme age, what
shall I say to you? That Time does rest on Eternity; that
he who has no vision of Eternity will never get a true hold of
Time, or its affairs. Time is so constructed; that is the <em>fact</em>
of the construction of this world. And no class of mortals
who have not,—through Nazareth or otherwise,—come to
get heartily acquainted with such fact, perpetually familiar
with it in all the outs and ins of their existence, have
ever found this Universe habitable long. Alas, no; their
fraternities, equalities, free-trade philosophies, greatest-happi-
ness principles, soon came to a conclusion; and the poor
creatures had to go,—to the Devil, I fear! Generations
such as ours play a curious part in World-History.</p>
<p>‘They sit as Apes do round a fire in the woods, but know
not how to feed it with fresh sticks. They have to quit it
soon, and march—into Chaos, as I conjecture; into that
land of which Bedlam is the Mount Zion. The world turns
out <em>not</em> to be made of mere eatables and drinkables, of news-
paper puff’s, gilt carriages, conspicuous flunkies; no, but of
something other than these! Old Suetonius Romans, corrupt
babbling Greeks of the Lower Empire, examples more than
one: consider them; be taught by them, add not to the
number of them. Heroism, not the apery and traditions of
Heroism; the feeling, spoken or silent, that in man’s life
there did lie a Godlike, and that his Time-history was verily
but an emblem of some Eternal: without this there had been
no Rome either; it was this that had made old Rome, old
Greece, and old Judea. Apes, with their wretched blinking
eyes, squatted round a fire which they cannot feed with
new wood; which they say will last forever without new
wood,—or, alas, which they say is going out forever: it is a
sad sight!’</p>
<p>Elsewhere my eccentric friend, as some call him,—whose
<em>centre</em>, however, I think I have got into,—has this passage:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Church, do you say? Look eighteen hundred years ago,
in the stable at Bethlehem: an infant laid in a manger!
Look, thou ass, and behold it; it is a fact,—the most
indubitable of facts: thou wilt thereby learn innumerable
things. Jesus of Nazareth and the life he led, and the death
he died, does it teach thee nothing? Through this, as
through a miraculous window, the heaven of Martyr Heroism,
the “divine depths of Sorrow,” of noble Labour, and the
unspeakable silent expanses of Eternity, first in man’s history
disclose themselves. The admiration of all nobleness, divine
<em>worship</em> of godlike nobleness, how universal it is in the
history of man!</p>
<p>But mankind, that singular entity mankind, is like the
fertilest, fluidest, most wondrous element, an element in which
the strangest things crystallise themselves, and spread out in
the most astounding growths. The event at Bethlehem was
of the Year One; but all years since that, eighteen hundred
of them now, have been contributing new growth to it,—and
see, there it stands: the Church! Touching the earth with
one small point; springing out of one small seedgrain, rising
out therefrom, ever higher, ever broader, high as the Heaven
itself, broad till it overshadow the whole visible Heaven and
Earth, and no star can be seen but through <em>it</em>. From such
a seedgrain so has it grown; planted in the reverences and
sacred opulences of the soul of mankind; fed continually by
all the noblenesses of some forty generations of men. The
world-tree of the Nations for so long!</p>
<p>Alas, if its roots are now dead, and it have lost hold of
the firm earth, or clear belief of mankind,—what, great as
it is, can by possibility become of it? Shaken to and fro,
in Jesuitisms, Gorham Controversies, and the storms of
inevitable Fate, it must sway hither and thither; nod ever
farther from the perpendicular; nod at last too far; and,—
sweeping the Eternal Heavens clear of its old brown foliage
and multitudinous rooks’-nests,—come to the ground with
much confused crashing, and <em>disclose</em> the diurnal and noc-
turnal Upper Lights again! The dead world-tree will have
declared itself dead. It will lie there an imbroglio of torn
boughs and ruined fragments, of bewildered splittings and
wide-spread shivers: out of which the poor inhabitants must
make what they can!—</p>
</blockquote>
<p>Enough now of Gathercoal and his
torch-gleams.</p>
<hr/>
<p>Simple souls still clamour occasionally for what they call
‘a new religion.’ My friends, you will not get this new
religion of yours;—I perceive, you already have it, have
always had it! All that is <em>true</em> is your ‘religion,’—is it not?
Commanded by the Eternal God to be <em>performed</em>, I should
think, if it is true! Do you not already, in your dim heads,
know truths by the thousand; and yet, in your dead hearts,
will you perform them by the ten, by the unit? New
religion! One last word with you on this rather con-
temptible subject.</p>
<p>You say, The old ages had a noble belief about the world,
and <em>therefore</em> were capable of a noble activity in the world.
My friends, it is partly true: your Scepticism and Jesuitism,
your ignoble no-belief, except what belief a beaver or judicious
pig were capable of, is too undeniable: observe, however, that
in this your fatal misery, there is action and reaction; and do
not confound the one with the other. Put the thing in its
right posture; cart not <em>before</em> horse, if you would make an
effort to stir from this fatal spot! It is your own falsity that
makes the Universe incredible. I affirm to you, this Universe,
in all times, and in your own poor time as well, is the express
image and direct counterpart of the human souls, and their
thoughts and activities, who dwell there. It is a true adage,
‘As the fool thinks, the bell clinks.’ ‘This mad Universe,’
says Novalis, ‘is the waste picture of your own dream.’ Be
noble of mind, all Nature gives response to your heroic struggle
for recognition by her; with her awful eternal voices answers
to every mind, “Yea, I am divine; be thou.” From the
cloud-whirl wind speaks a God yet, my friend, to every man
who has a human soul. To the inhuman brute-soul, indeed,
she answers, “Yea, I am brutal; a big cattle-stall, rag-fair
and St. Catherine’s wharf: enter thou, and fat victual, if
thou be faithful, shall not fail.”</p>
<p>Not because Heaven existed, did men know Good from
Evil; the ‘because,’ I invite you to consider, lay quite the
other way. It was <em>because</em> men, having hearts as well as
stomachs, felt there, and knew through all their being, the
difference between Good and Evil, that Heaven and Hell first
came to exist. That is the sequence; that and not the con-
trary. If you have now no Heaven to look to; if you now
sprawl, lamed and lost, sunk to the chin in the pathless
sloughs of this lower world without guidance from above,
know that the fault is not Heaven’s at all; but your own!
Our poor friends ‘the Apes by the Dead Sea’ have now no
Heaven either; they look into this Universe now, and find it
tragically grown to be the Humbug they insisted on its being.
Moses went his ways, and this enchantment fell upon them!
Such ‘enchantments’ rhadamanthine Nature does yet daily
execute on the rebellious; he that has eyes may still daily
see them,—fearful and wonderful ever as of old.</p>
<p>How can you believe in a Heaven,—the like of you?
What struggle in your mean existence ever pointed thither-
ward? None. The first heroic soul sent down into this
world, he, looking up into the sea of stars, around into the
moaning forests and big oceans, into life and death, love and
hate, and joy and sorrow, and the illimitable loud- thundering
Loom of Time,—was struck dumb by it (as the thought of
every earnest soul still is); and fell on his face, and with his
heart cried for salvation in the world-whirlpool: to him the
‘open secret of this Universe’ was no longer quite a secret,
but he had caught a glimpse of it,—much hidden from the
like of us in these times: “Do nobly, thou shalt resemble the
Maker of all this; do ignobly, the Enemy of the Maker.”
This is the ‘divine sense of Right and Wrong in man’; true
reading of his position in this Universe forevermore; the
indisputable GodVmessage still legible in every created heart,
—though speedily erased and painted over, under ‘articles,’
and cants and empty ceremonials, in so many hearts; making
the ‘open secret’ a very shut one indeed!—</p>
<p>My friends, across these fogs of murky twaddle and philan-
thropism, in spite of sad decadent ‘world-trees,’ with their
rookeries of foul creatures,—the silent stars, and all the
eternal luminaries of the world, shine even now to him that
has an eye. In this day as in all days, around and in every
man, are voices from the gods, imperative to all, if obeyed by
even none, which say audibly, “Arise, thou son of Adam, son
of Time; make this thing more divine; and that thing,—and
thyself, of all things; and work, and sleep not; for the Night
cometh, wherein no man can work!” He that has an ear
may still hear.</p>
<hr/>
<p>Surely, surely this ignoble sluggishness, sceptical torpor,
indifference to all that does not bear on Mammon and his
interests is not the natural state of human creatures; and is
not doomed to be their final one! Other states once were,
or there had never been a Society, or any noble thing, among
us at all. Under this brutal stagnancy there lies painfully
imprisoned some tendency which could become heroic.</p>
<p>The restless gnawing ennui which, like a dark dim ocean-
flood, communicating with the Phlegethons and Stygian deeps,
begirdles every human life so guided,—is it not the painful
cry even of that imprisoned heroism? Imprisoned it will
never rest; set forth at present, on these sad terms, it cannot
be. You unfortunates, what is the use of your money-bags,
of your territories, funded properties, your mountains of
possessions, equipments and mechanic inventions, which the
flunky pauses over, awestruck, and almost rises into epos and
prophecy at sight of? No use, or less than none. Your skin
is covered, and your digestive and other bodily apparatus
is supplied; and you have but to wish in these respects,
and more is ready; and—the Devils, I think, are quizzing
you. You ask for ‘happiness,’ “O give me happiness!”—
and they hand you ever new varieties of covering for the skin,
ever new kinds of supply for the digestive apparatus, new
and ever new, worse or not a whit better than the old;
and—and—this is your ‘happiness’? As if you were sick
children; as if you were not men, but a kind of apes!</p>
<p>I rather say, be thankful for your ennui; it is your last
mark of manhood; this at least is a perpetual admonition, and
true sermon preached to you. From the chair of verity this,
whatever chairs be chairs of <em>cant</em>ity. Happiness is <em>not</em> come,
nor like to come; ennui, with its great waste ocean-voice,
moans answer, Never, never. That ocean-voice, I tell you, is
a great fact, it comes from Phlegethon and the gates of the
Abyss; its bodeful never-resting inexorable moan is the voice
of primeval Fate, and of the eternal necessity of things. Will
you shake away your nightmare and arise; or must you lie
writhing under it, till death relieve you? Unfortunate crea-
tures! You are fed, clothed, lodged as men never were
before; every day in new variety of magnificence are you
equipped and attended to; such wealth of material means as
is now yours was never dreamed of by man before:—and to
do any noble thing, with all this mountain of implements, is
forever denied you. Only ignoble, expensive and unfruitful
things can you now do; nobleness has vanished from the
sphere where you live. The way of it is lost, lost; the possi-
bility of it has become incredible. We must try to do
without it, I am told.—Well; rejoice in your upholsteries
and cookeries, then, if so be they will make you ‘happy.’
Let the varieties of them be continual and innumerable. In
all things let perpetual change, if that is a perpetual blessing
to you, be your portion instead of mine; incur that Prophet’s
curse, and in all things in this sublunary world ‘make your-
selves like unto a wheel.’ Mount into your railways; whirl
from place to place, at the rate of fifty, or if you like of five
hundred miles an hour: you cannot escape from that inexor-
able all-encircling ocean-moan of ennui. No: if you would
mount to the stars, and do yacht-voyages under the belts of
Jupiter, or stalk deer on the ring of Saturn, it would still
begirdle you. You cannot escape from it, you can but
change your place in it, without solacement except one
moment’s. That prophetic Sermon from the Deeps will
continue with you, till you wisely interpret it and do it, or
else till the Crack of Doom swallow it and you. <i xml:lang="fr">Adieu</i>:
<i xml:lang="fr">Au revoir</i>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
