<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Parliaments</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:essay">
		<section id="parliaments" epub:type="chapter">
            <header>
                <h2>
                    <span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
                    <br/>
                    <span epub:type="subtitle">Parliaments</span>
                </h2>
                <p epub:type="se:essay.dateline">1st June 1850</p>
            </header>
<p>
By this time it is sufficiently apparent the present Editor is 
not one of those who expect to see the Country saved by 
farther ‘reforming’ the reformed Parliament we have got. 
On the contrary, he has the sad conviction that from such 
Parliament never so ingeniously reformed, there can no salvation
come, but only a speedy finale far different from salvation. 
It is his effort and desire to teach this and the other thinking 
British man that said finale, the advent namely of actual 
open Anarchy, cannot be distant, now when virtual disguised 
Anarchy, long-continued and waxing daily, has got to such 
a height; and that the one method of staving-off that fatal 
consummation, and steering towards the Continents of the 
Future, lies not in the direction of reforming Parliament, but 
of what he calls reforming Downing Street; a thing infinitely 
urgent to be begun, and to be strenuously carried on. To 
find a Parliament more and more the express image of the 
People, could, unless the People chanced to be wise as well as 
miserable, give him no satisfaction. Not this at all; but to 
find some sort of <em>King</em>, made in the image of God, who 
could a little achieve for the People, if not their spoken wishes, 
yet their dumb wants, and what they would at last find to 
have been their instinctive <em>will</em>,—which is a far different 
matter usually, in this babbling world of ours.</p>
<p> Qualification movement, universal-suffrage movement, Re- 
form Association, and suchlike, this Editor does not enjoin 
upon his readers;—his readers whom (as every crow is known 
to think her own eggs whitest) he considers to be a select 
class, the true Aristocracy of England, capable of far better 
things than these. Which better things, and not the worse, 
it is his heart's wish to urge them upon doing. And yet, 
alas, how can he forbid any reader of his, or of other people's, 
to join such suffrage movement, or still more distracted 
Chartism of Six Points, if it seem hopeful? Where we are, 
is no continuing. Men say: “The finale must come, ought 
to come; perhaps the sooner it comes, it will be the lighter 
to bear. If the foul universal boil is to go on ripening, 
under mere Leave-alone and Premiers of the Phantasm order, 
perhaps the sooner it bursts, and declares itself as universal 
gangrene and social death, the better!” Good Heavens, 
have men computed what the bursting-out of virtual dis- 
guised Anarchy into open undeniable Anarchy, such as they 
have in the Continental countries just now, amounts to in 
human affairs; what a game that of trying for cure in the 
Medea's-caldron of Revolution is! Must we also front the 
Apotheosis of Attorneyism; and know what the blackest 
of terrestrial curses means?</p> 
<p>But if the captains of the ship are of that scandalous class 
who refuse to be warned <em>except</em> by iceberg counsellors nudging 
them, what are the miserable crew to do? Yes, the crew 
had better consider of that; they have greatly too little 
considered it of late. They will find that in Nature there 
is no such alarming creature as a Chief Governor of that 
humour, in getting round a Cape Horn like this of ours; 
that, if pity did not check our rage, there is no such traitor 
in the ship as this unconscious one! Who, placidly assured, 
nothing doubting but he is the friend of gods and men, can 
stand with imperturbable attitude, quietly steering, by his 
old Whig and other charts of the British Channel (as if we 
were still <em>there</em> or thereabouts), into the yawning mouth of 
Chaos, on the other side of the world; and call it passing 
the Forelands in rough weather, or getting into Cowes, by 
constitutional methods, and ‘remedial measures suited to the 
occasion.’ Our heart's prayer in those circumstances is: 
From such Chief Governors, good Lord deliver us! And if 
masses of the desperate common men before the mast do 
invoke Chartism rather, and <em>invite</em> the iceberg counsellors to 
nudge him,—cannot we too well understand it? I hope, in 
other quarters of the ship there are men who know wiser 
courses, and instead of inviting the iceberg counsellors and 
Six Points, will direct all their strength to fling the 
Phantasm Captain under hatches. It is with the view of 
aiding and encouraging these latter that we now institute a 
few considerations upon Parliaments generally.</p>
<hr/>
<p>Dryasdust in his lumber-masses, which he calls treatises 
and histories, has not been explicit about Parliaments: but 
we need not doubt, the English Parliament, as windy a 
palavering and imaginary entity as it has now grown to be, 
was at one time a quite solid serious actuality, met for earnest 
despatch of work which, on the King's part and the Commonwealth's,
needed absolutely to be done. Reading in Eadmerua 
and the dim old Books, one finds gradually that the Parliament
was at first a most simple Assemblage, quite cognate to 
the situation; that Red William, or whoever had taken on 
him the terrible task of being King in England, was wont to 
invite, oftenest about Christmas time, his subordinate Kinglets, 
Barons as he called them, to give him the pleasure of their 
company for a week or two: there, in earnest conference all 
morning, in freer talk over Christmas cheer all evening, in 
some big royal Hall of Westminster, Winchester, or whereever
it might be, with log-fires, huge rounds of roast and 
boiled, not lacking malmsey and other generous liquor, they 
took counsel concerning the arduous matters of the kingdom. 
“You Taillebois, what have you to propose in this arduous 
matter?—Frontdebœuf has another view; thinks, in his 
southern counties, they will go with the Protectionist movement,
and repeal the malt-tax, the African Squadron, and 
the window-duty itself.—Potdevin, what is your opinion 
of the measure; will it hold in your parts? So, Fitzurse 
disagrees, then!—Tête-d'étoupes, speak out. And first, the 
pleasure of a glass of wine, my infant?” Thus, for a fortnight's
space, they carried on, after a human manner, their 
grand National Consult or <i xml:lang="la">Parliamentum</i>; intermingling 
Dinner with it (as is still the modern method); debating 
everything, as Tacitus describes the Ancient Germans to have 
done, two times: once sober, and once what he calls ‘drunk,’—not
dead-drunk, but jolly round their big table;—that so 
both sides of the matter might be seen; and, midway between 
rash hope and unreasonable apprehension, the true decision 
of it might be hit. To this hour no public matter, with 
whatever serious argument, can be settled in England till 
it have been dined upon, perhaps repeatedly dined upon.</p>
<p>To King Rufus there could no more natural method present
itself, of getting his affairs of sovereignty transacted, 
than this same. To assemble all his working Sub-kings 
about him; and gather in a human manner, by the aid of 
sad speech and of cheerful, what their real notions, opinions, 
and determinations were. No way of making a law, or of 
getting one executed when made, except by even such a 
General Consult in one form or another.—Naturally too, 
as in all places where men meet, there established themselves 
modes of proceeding in this Christmas <i xml:lang="la">Parliamentum</i>:
secretaries from the first were needed there, strict record of the 
results arrived-at being indispensable: and the methods of 
arriving, marginally noted or otherwise, would not be forgotten:
such methods, with trials of ever new methods, 
accumulating, and in the course of continual practice getting 
sifted, rejected, adopted, and committed to record,—the vast 
elaboration, now called Law of Parliament, Privilege, Practice 
of Parliament, and that huge sheepskin quarry, in which 
Dryasdust bores and grovels as if the world's or England's 
secret lay there, grew to be what we see.</p>
<p>So likewise in the time of the Edwards, when Parliament 
gradually split itself into Two Houses; and Borough Members 
and Knights of the Shire were summoned up to answer, 
Whether they could stand such and such an impost? and 
took upon them to answer, “Yes, your Majesty; but we 
have such and such grievances greatly in need of redress 
first,"—nothing could be more natural and human than such 
a Parliament still was. And so, granting subsidies, stating 
grievances, and notably widening its field in that latter 
direction, accumulating new modes, and practices of Parliament
greatly important in world-history, the old Parliament 
continued an eminently human, veracious, and indispensable 
entity, achieving real work in the Centuries. Down, we may 
say, to the Century of Charles First, when being constrained 
by unforeseen necessity to do so, it took suddenly, like water 
at the boiling point, a quite immense development of 
function; and performed that new function too, to the 
world's and its own amazement, in an eminently human, 
authentic and effectual manner,—the ‘supply’ it granted his 
Majesty, this time (in front of Whitehall, as it ultimately 
proved), being of a very unexpected yet by no means 
unessential nature; and the ‘grievance’ it now stated for 
redress being the transcendent one of Compulsion towards 
Spiritual Nightmare, towards Canting Idolatry, and Death 
Eternal,—which I do not wonder that they couldn't endure, 
and wouldn't! Which transcendent grievance, it is well 
known, they did get redressed, in a most conspicuous manner, 
they, for the time being;—and so have since set all the 
world upon similar but far less hopeful attempts, by methods 
which <em>appear</em> the same, and are not the same but different.</p>
<p>This Long Parliament which conquered its King, and even 
extinguished him, since he would in no way be quiet when 
conquered; and which thus, the first of such Assemblages, 
declared that it was Sovereign in the Nation, and more royal 
than any King who could be there,—has set a flaming pattern 
to all the world, which now after centuries all the world is 
fruitlessly bent to emulate. This ever-memorable Long 
Parliament is definable, both in regard to its destinies in 
History, and to its intrinsic collective and individual worth 
among Deliberative Assemblies, as the Acme of Parliaments; 
the highest that it lay in them to be, or to do, in human 
affairs. The consummation, this, and slow cactus-flowerage 
of the parliamentary tree among mankind, which blossoms 
only in thousands of years, and is seen only once by men: 
the Father, this, of all Congresses, National Conventions 
and sublunary Parliaments that have since been.</p>
<p>But what I had to remark of this Long Parliament, and 
of its English predecessors generally from the times of Rufus 
downwards, is their perfect veracity of purpose, their exact 
adaptation to getting the business done that was in hand. 
Supplies did, in some way, need to be granted; grievances, 
such as never fail, did in some way need to be stated and 
redressed. The silent Peoples had their <i xml:lang="la">Parliamentum</i>;
and spake by it to their Kings who governed them. In all human 
Government, wherever a man will attempt to govern men, 
this is a function necessary as the breath of life: and it must 
be said the old European Populations and the fortunate 
English best of all, did this function <em>well</em>. The old Parliaments
were authentic entities; came upon indispensable 
work; and were in earnest to their very finger-ends about 
getting it done. No conclave of railway directors, met with 
closed doors upon the sacred cause of scrip and dividends, 
could be more intent upon the business necessary, or be more 
appropriate for it, than those old Parliaments were.</p>
<hr/>
<p>In modern Parliaments, again, indeed ever down from the 
Long Parliament, I note a sad gradual falling-off in this 
matter of ‘veracity,’—which, alas, means a falling-off in all 
real use, or possible advantage, there can be to mankind in 
such Institutions. The Parliament, if we examine well, has 
irrevocably lost certain of its old functions, which it still 
pretends to do; and has got certain new functions, which 
it never can do, and yet pretends to be doing: a doubly fatal 
predicament for the Parliament. Its functions growing ever 
more confused in this twofold way, the position of the Parliament
has become a false, and has gradually been becoming 
an impossible one, in modern affairs. While on the other 
hand, the poor Parliament, little conscious of all that, and 
long dimly struggling to remedy all that, and exist amidst 
it; or in later years, still more fatally admitting all that, 
and quietly consenting to exist beside it <em>without</em> remedy, 
has had to distort and pervert its poor activity in all manner 
of ways; and at length has diffused itself into oceans of 
windy talk reported in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Hansard</i>;
has grown, in short, a National Palaver; and is, as I said lately, one of the strangest 
entities this sun ever looked down upon. For, I think, a 
National Palaver recognised as Sovereign, a solemn Convocation
of all the Stump-Orators in the Nation to come and 
govern us, was not seen in the earth till recently. I consider 
it has been reserved for these our Latter Generations; a 
product long ripening for us from afar;—and would fain 
hope that, like the Long Parliament, or acme and consummate 
flower in any kind, it can only be a transient phenomenon!</p> 
<p>Some functions that are and continue real the Parliament 
still has;—and these it becomes infinitely necessary to dissever,
and extricate alive, from the ocean of unreality in 
which they swim. Unreality is death, to Parliaments and 
to all things. The real functions whatsoever they are, these, 
most certainly, are all the good we shall ever get of Parliament;
and the question now is, Shall said good be 
drowned, or not be drowned, in the immeasurable accom- 
paniment of imaginary functions which are evil and falsity, 
and that only?</p>
<hr/>
<p>In the way of changed times I note two grand modern 
facts, omitting many minor, which have, one of them irre- 
vocably, and the other hopelessly for the present, altered from 
top to bottom the function and position of all Parliaments; 
and which do now fatally vitiate their procedure everywhere, 
rendering much of what they do a superfluity, a mere 
hypocrisy, or noxious grimace; and thus infecting even what 
is real in their function with a windy falsity, lamentable to 
behold and greatly requiring to be altered: Fact <i>first</i>, the 
existence of an Unfettered Press, with its perennial ever-increasing
torrent of morning newspapers, pamphlets, books: 
fact <i>second</i>, that there is now no King present in Parliament; 
no King now there, the <em>King</em> having vanished,—in front 
of Whitehall, long since! Fact first I take to be unalterable.
Complete alteration of fact second I discern to be 
distant, but likewise to be indispensable and inevitable; and 
to require urgently here and now (by <i>New Downing Streets</i>
or otherwise) a strenuous beginning, from all good citizens 
who would do any reform in their generation. Both facts 
together have dislocated every joint of the old arrangement, 
and made the modern Parliament a new creature; and 
whosoever means to work reform there, will either open his 
eyes, and keep them open, to both these facts, or work only 
mischief and ruin.</p>
<hr/>
<p>In countries that can stand a Free Press,—which many 
cannot, but which England, thanks to her long good training, 
still can,—it is evident the National Consult or <em>real</em> Parliamentary
Debate goes on of itself, everywhere, continually. 
Is not the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i> newspaper an open Forum, open as never 
Forum was before, where all mortals vent their opinion, state 
their grievance,—all manner of grievances, from loss of your 
umbrella in a railway, to loss of your honour and fortune by 
unjust sovereign persons? One grand branch of the Parliament's
trade is evidently dead forever! And the beautiful 
Elective Parliament itself is nothing like so living as it used 
to be. If we will consider it, the essential truth of the 
matter is, every British man can now elect <em>himself</em> to Parliament
without consulting the hustings at all. If there 
be any vote, idea or notion in him, on any earthly or heavenly 
thing, cannot he take a pen, and therewith autocratically 
pour forth the same into the ears and hearts of all people, 
so far as it will go? Precisely so far; and, what is a great 
advantage too, no farther. The discussion of questions goes 
on, not in St. Stephen's now, but from Dan to Beersheba 
by able-editors and articulate-speaking creatures that can 
get others to listen to them. This is the fact; and it demands 
to be attended to as such,—and will produce changes, I 
think, by and by.</p> 
<p>What is the good of men collected, with effort, to debate 
on the benches of St. Stephen's, now when there is a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i>
Newspaper? Not the discussion of questions; only the ulti- 
mate voting of them (a very brief process, I should think!) 
requires to go on, or can veritably go on, in St. Stephen's 
now. The honourable gentleman is oftenest very wearisome 
in St. Stephen's now: his and his Constituency's <i>Aye</i> or <i>No</i>, 
is all we want of the honourable gentleman there; all we are 
ever like to get of him there, could it but be had without 
admixtures! If your Lordship will reflect on it, you will 
find it an obsolete function, this debating one of his; useless 
in these new times, as a set of riding postboys would be, 
along the line of the Great Western Railway. Loving my 
life, and time which is the stuff of life, I read no Parliamentary
Debates, rarely any Parliamentary Speech; but I 
am told there is not, once in the seven years, the smallest 
gleam of new intelligence thrown on any matter, earthly or 
divine, by an honourable gentleman on his legs in Parliament. 
Nothing offered you but wearisome, dreary, thrice-boiled 
colewort;—a bad article at first, and served and again served 
in Newspapers and Periodical and other Literatures, till even 
the inferior animals would recoil from it. Honourable gentlemen
have complained to myself that under the sky there was 
not such a bore. What is or can be the use of this, your 
Lordship?</p> 
<p>Let an honourable gentleman who has colewort, or stump-oratory
of that kind, send it direct to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i>; perhaps 
they will print it for him, and then all persons can read 
it there who hope instruction from it. If the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i> refuse 
to print it, let the honourable gentleman, if still so minded, 
print it at his own expense; let him advertise it at a penny 
the gross, distribute it gratis as handbill, or even offer a 
small reward per head to any citizen that will read it: but 
if, after all, no body of citizens will read it even for a reward, 
then let the honourable gentleman retire into himself, and 
consider what such omens mean! So much I take to be fair, 
or at least unavoidable in a free country: Let every creature 
try to get his opinion listened to; and let honourable gentlemen
who can print their own stump-oratory, and offer the 
public a reward for using it, by all means do so. But that, 
when no human being will incline or even consent to have 
their said oratory, they can get upon their legs in Parliament 
and pour it out still, to the burdening of many Newspapers, 
to the boring of their fellow-creatures, and generally to the 
despair of all thinking citizens in the community: this is and 
remains, I must crave to say, an infatuation, and, whatever 
respectable old coat you put upon it, is fast growing a 
nuisance which must be abated.</p>
<p>Still more important for a Parliament is the question: 
King present there, or no King? Certain it always is, and 
if forgotten, it much requires to be brought to mind, that 
a Parliament acting in the character of a body to be consulted
by the sovereign ruler, or executive King of a Nation, 
differs immensely from a Parliament which is itself to enact 
the sovereign ruler, and to be supreme over all things; not 
merely giving its advice, its remonstrance, dissent or assent, 
and leaving the ruler still to decide with that new illumination;
but deciding of itself, and by its Yes or its No 
peremptorily ordering all things to be or not to be. These, 
I say, are two extremely different characters for a Parliament 
to enact; and they necessitate all manner of distinctions, of 
the most vital nature, in our idea of a Parliament; so that 
what applies with full force to a Parliament acting the 
former character, will not apply at all to one enacting 
the latter: nay, what is of the highest benefit in the former 
kind of Parliament, may not only in the latter kind be 
of no benefit, but be even of the fatalest detriment, and 
bring destruction to the poor Parliament itself and to all 
that depends thereon.</p>
<p>It is first of all, therefore, to be inquired, Whether your 
Parliament is actually in practice the Adviser of the Sovereign; 
or is the Sovereign itself? For the distinction is profound; 
goes down to the very roots of Parliament and of the Body 
Politic: and if you confound the two kinds of Parliaments, 
and apply to the one the psalmodyings and celebratings of 
constitutional doctors (very rife through the eighteenth 
century), which were meant for the other, and were partly 
true of the other, but are altogether false of this,—you will 
set forth in a radically wrong course, and will advance 
incessantly, with whatever psalmodyings of your own or of 
the world's, to a goal you are like to be much surprised at!—
Under which of these two descriptions the British Parliament
of our time falls, no one can need to be informed. 
Apart from certain thin fictions, and constitutional cobwebs 
which it is not expected any one should not see through, our 
Parliament is the sovereign ruler and real executive King of 
this Empire; and constitutional men, who for a century past 
have been singing praises to that sublime Institution in its 
old character, are requested to look at it in this new one, 
and see what praises it has earned for itself there. Hitherto, 
in these last fifteen years since it has worked without shackle 
in that new character, one does not find its praises mount 
very high! The exercise of English Sovereignty, if that mean 
governance of the Twenty-seven million British souls and 
guidance of their temporal and eternal interests towards a 
good issue, does not seem to stand on the very best footing 
just at present! Not as a Sovereign Ruler of the Twenty-seven
million British men, or heroic guide of their temporal 
or their eternal interests, has the reformed Parliament 
distinguished itself as yet, but otherwise only if at all.</p>
<p>In fact, there rises universally the complaint, and expression
of surprise, That our reformed Parliament cannot 
get on with any kind of work, except that of talking, which 
does not serve much; and the Chief Minister has been heard 
lamenting, in a pathetic manner, that the Business of the 
Nation (meaning thereby the voting of the supplies) was 
dreadfully obstructed; and that it would be difficult for him 
to accomplish the Business of the Nation (meaning thereby 
the voting of the supplies), if honourable gentlemen would not 
please to hold their tongues a little. It is really pathetic, 
after a sort; and unless parliamentary eloquence will suffice 
the British Nation, and its businesses and wants, one sees not 
what is to become of us in that direction. For, in fine, the 
tragic experience is dimly but irrepressibly forcing itself on 
all the world, that our British Parliament does not shine as 
Sovereign Ruler of the British Nation; that it was excellent 
only as Adviser of the Sovereign Ruler; and has not, somehow 
or other, the art of getting work done; but produces talk 
merely, not of the most instructive sort for most part, and in 
vortexes of talk is not unlike to submerge itself and the whole 
of us, if help come not!</p> 
<p>My own private notion, which I invite all reformed British 
citizens to reflect on, is and has for a long time been, That 
this dim universal experience, which points towards very tragic 
facts, will more and more rapidly become a clear universal 
experience, and disclose a tragic law of Nature little dreamt 
of by constitutional men of these times. That a Parliament, 
especially a Parliament with Newspaper Reporters firmly 
established in it, is an entity which by its very nature cannot 
do work, but can do talk only,—which at times may be 
needed, and at other times again may be very needless. 
Consider, in fact, a body of Six-hundred and fifty-eight mis- 
cellaneous persons set to consult about ‘business’ with 
Twenty-seven millions mostly fools assiduously listening to 
them, and checking and criticising them:—was there ever 
since the world began, will there ever be till the world end, 
any ‘business’ accomplished in these circumstances? The 
beginning of all business everywhere, as all practical persons 
testify, is decidedly this, That every man <em>shut</em> his mouth, and 
do not open it again till his thinking and contriving faculty 
have elaborated something worth articulating. Which rule 
will much abridge the flow of speech in such assemblies! 
This, however, is the preliminary fundamental rule for business; 
and this, alas, is precisely the rule which cannot be attended 
to in constitutional Parliaments.</p> 
<p>Add now another most unfortunate condition, That your 
Parliamentary Assembly is <em>not</em> very much in earnest, not at 
all ‘dreadfully in earnest,’ to do even the best it can; that in 
general the Nation it represents is no longer an earnest 
Nation, but a light, sceptical, epicurean one, which for a 
century has gone along smirking, grimacing, cutting jokes 
about all things, and has not been bent with dreadful 
earnestness on anything at all, except on making money each 
member of it for himself: here, certainly enough, is a Parliament
that will do no business except such as can be done in 
sport; and unfortunately, it is well known, almost none can 
be done in that way. To which Parliament, in the centre of 
such a Nation, introduce now assiduous Newspaper Reporters, 
and six yards of small type laid on all breakfast-tables every 
morning; alas, are not the Six-hundred and fifty-eight miscellaneous
gentlemen, who sit to do sovereign business in such 
circumstances, verily a self-contradiction, a solecism in Nature; 
—Nature having appointed that business shall not be done in 
that way? Incapable they of doing business; capable of 
speech only, and this none of the best. Speech which, as we 
can too well see, whether it be speech to the question and to 
the wise men near, or ‘speech to Buncombe’ (as the Americans 
call it), to the distant constituencies and the twenty-seven 
millions mostly fools, will yearly grow more worthless as 
speech, and threaten to finish by becoming burdensome to 
gods and men!</p>
<p>So that the sad conclusion, which all experience, wherever 
it has been tried, is fatally making good, appears to be, That 
Parliaments, admirable as Advising Bodies, and likely to be 
in future universally useful in that capacity, are, as Ruling 
and Sovereign Bodies, not useful, but useless or worse. That 
a Sovereign with nine-hundred or with six-hundred and fifty- 
eight heads, all set to talk against each other in the presence 
of thirty-four or twenty-seven or eighteen millions, cannot do 
the work of sovereignty at all; but is smitten with eternal 
incompetence for that function by the law of Nature itself, 
Such, alas, is the sad conclusion; and in England, and wherever 
else it is tried, a sad experience will rapidly make it good.</p>
<p>Only perhaps in the United States, which alone of countries 
can do <em>without</em> governing,—every man being at least able to 
live, and move-off into the wilderness, let Congress jargon as it 
will,—can such a form of so-called ‘Government’ continue, 
for any length of time, to torment men with the semblance, 
when the indispensable substance is not there. For America, 
as the citizens well know, is an ‘unparalleled country,’ with 
mud soil enough and fierce sun enough in the Mississippi 
Valley alone to grow Indian corn for all the extant Posterity 
of Adam at this time;—what other country ever stood in 
such a case? ‘Speeches to Buncombe,’ and a constitutional 
battle of the Kilkenny cats, which in other countries are 
becoming tragical and unendurable, may there still fall under 
the comical category. If indeed America should ever experience
a higher call, as is likely, and begin to feel diviner wants 
than that of Indian corn with abundant bacon and molasses, 
and unlimited scope for all citizens to hunt dollars,—America 
too will find that caucuses, division-lists, stump-oratory and 
speeches to Buncombe will <em>not</em> carry men to the immortal gods; 
that the Washington Congress, and constitutional battle of 
Kilkenny cats is, there as here, naught for such objects; 
quite incompetent for such; and, in fine, that said sublime 
constitutional arrangement will require to be (with terrible 
throes, and travail such as few expect yet) remodelled, abridged, 
extended, suppressed; torn asunder, put together again;—not
without heroic labour, and effort quite other than that of 
the Stump-Orator and the Revival Preacher, one day!</p>
<p>Thus if the first grand branch of parliamentary business, 
that of stating grievances, has fallen to the Unfettered Presses, 
and become quite dead for Parliaments, infecting them with 
mere hypocrisy when they now try it,—the second or new 
grand branch of business intrusted to them, and passionately 
expected and demanded of them, is one which they cannot 
do; the attempt and pretence to do which can only still 
farther involve them in hypocrisy, in fatal cecity, stump-oratory,
futility, and the faster accelerate their doom, and 
ours if we depend on them.</p>
<p>We may take it as a fact, and should lay it to heart everywhere,
That no Sovereign Ruler with six-hundred and fifty-eight
heads, set to rule twenty-seven millions, by continually 
talking in the hearing of them all, can for the life of it make 
a good figure in that vocation; but must by nature make a 
bad figure, and ever a worse and worse, till, some good day, 
by soft recession or by rude propulsion, as the Omnipotent 
Beneficence may direct it—get relieved from said vocation.</p>
<hr/>
<p>In the whole course of History I have heard of only 
two Parliaments of the sovereign sort, that did the work of 
sovereignty with some effect: the National Convention, in 
Paris, during the French Revolution; and the Long Parliament,
here at London, during our own. Not that the work, 
in either case, was perfect; far enough from that; but with 
all imperfections it was got done; and neither of these two 
workers proved to be quite futile, or a solecism in its place in 
the world. These two Parliaments succeeded, and did not 
fail. The conditions, however, were peculiar; not likely to 
be soon seen again.</p>
<p>In the first place, of both these Parliaments it can be said 
that they <em>were</em> ‘dreadfully in earnest’; in earnest as no 
Parliaments before or since ever were. Nay, indeed, in the 
end, it had become a matter of life or death with them. 
But apart from that latter consideration, in the Long Parliament
especially, nothing so astonishes a modern man as the 
serious, solemn, nay, devout, religiously earnest spirit in which 
almost every member had come up to his task. For the 
English was yet a serious devout Nation,—as in fact it 
intrinsically still is, and ever tends and strives to be; this 
its poor modern levity, sceptical knowingness, and sniffing 
grinning humour, being forced on it, and sitting it very ill: 
—ever a devout Nation, I say; and the Divine Presence yet 
irradiated this poor Earth and its business to most men; and 
to all Englishmen the Parliament, we can observe, was still 
what their Temple was to the ancient Hebrews; the most 
august of terrestrial objects, into which when a man entered, 
he felt that he was standing on holy ground. Literally so; 
and much is the modern man surprised at it; and only after 
much reluctance can he admit it to be credible, to be certain 
and visible among our old fathers there.—In which temper 
alone, is there not sure promise of work being done, under 
any circumstances whatsoever? Given any lamest Talking 
Parliament, with its Chartisms or its starving Irish, and a 
starving world getting all into pike-points round it; given 
the saddest natural solecism discoverable in the Earth or 
under the Earth;—inform it with this noble spirit, it will 
from the first hour become a <em>less</em> sad solecism; it will, if such 
divine spirit hold in it, and nerve its continual efforts, cease 
at last to be a solecism, and by self-sacrifice or otherwise 
become a veracity, and get itself <em>adopted</em> by Nature.</p>
<p>But secondly, what likewise is of immense significance, the 
Long Parliament had no Reporters. Very far from that; no 
Member himself durst so much as whisper to any extraneous 
mortal, without leave given, what went on within those sacred 
walls. Solemn reprimand from the Speaker, austere lodgment 
in the Tower, if he did. If a patriot stranger, coming up on 
express pilgrimage from the country, chance to gaze in from 
the Lobby too curiously on the august Assemblage (as once 
or twice happens), he is instantly seized by the fit usher; led, 
pale as his shirt, into the floor of the honourable House, 
Speaker Lenthall's and four hundred other pairs of Olympian 
eyes transfixing him, that it be there ascertained, Whether 
the Tower, the Tarpeian rock, or what in Nature or out of 
it, shall be the doom of such a man! A silent place withal, 
though a talking one; hermetically sealed; no whisper to be 
published of it, except what the honourable House itself 
directs. Let a modern honourable member, with his reporters'
gallery, his strangers' gallery, his female ventilator, and twenty-seven
millions mostly fools listening to him at Buncombe, 
while all at hand are asleep, consider what a fact is that 
old one!</p>
<p>But thirdly, what also is a most important fact in this 
question, the Long Parliament, after not many months of 
private debating, split itself fairly into two parties; and the 
Opposition party fairly rode away, designing to <em>debate</em> in 
another manner thenceforth. What an abatement of parliamentary
eloquence in that one fact by itself, is evident 
enough! The Long Parliament, for all manner of reasons, 
for these three and for others that could be given, was an 
unexampled Parliament—properly indeed, as I sometimes 
define it, the Father of all Parliaments which have sat since 
in this world!</p>
<br/>
<p>The French Convention did its work, too; and this under 
circumstances intrinsically similar, much as they differed out- 
wardly. No Parliament more ‘in earnest’ ever sat in any 
country or time; and indeed it was the Parliament of a 
Nation all in deadly earnest; gambling against the world for 
life or for death. The Convention had indeed Reporters; and 
encountered much parliamentary eloquence at its starting, and 
underwent strange handlings and destinies in consequence; 
but we know how <em>it</em> managed with its parliamentary eloquence, 
and got that reduced to limits, when once business did behove 
to be done! The Convention, its Girondins and opposition 
parties once thrown out, had its Committee of <i xml:lang="fr">Salut Publique</i>, 
consisting of Twelve, of Nine, or even properly of Three; in 
whose hands lay all sovereign business, and the whole terrible 
task of ascertaining what was to be done. Of which latter, 
the latter being itself so immense, so swift and imperatively 
needful, all parliamentary eloquence was to be the enforce- 
ment and publisher and recorder merely. And whatever 
eloquent heads chose to obstruct this sovereign Committee, 
the Convention had its guillotine, and swiftly rid itself of 
these and of their eloquence. Whereby business went on, 
without let on that side; and actually got itself done!</p>
<p>These are the only instances I know, of Parliaments that 
succeeded in the business of Government; and these I think 
are <em>not</em> inviting instances to the British reformer of this day. 
Rather what we may call paroxysms of parliamentary life, 
than instances of what could be continuously expected of 
any Parliament,—or perhaps even transiently wished of any. 
They were the appropriate, and as it proved, the effectual 
organism for Periods of a quite transcendent character in 
National Life; such as it is not either likely or desirable that 
we should see, except at very long intervals, in human affairs.</p>
<hr/>
<p>The fact is, Parliaments have had two great blows, in 
modern times: and are now in a manner quite shorn of their 
real strength, and what is still worse, invested with an 
imaginary. Faust of Mentz, when he invented ‘movable 
types,’ inflicted a terrible blow on Parliaments; suddenly, 
though yet afar off, reducing them to a mere scantling of 
their former self, and taking all the best business out of their 
hands. Then again John Bradshaw, when he ordered the 
hereditary <em>King</em> to vanish, in front of Whitehall, and pro- 
claimed that Parliament itself was King,—John, little 
conscious of it, inflicted a still more terrible blow on Parliaments;
appointing them to do (especially with <em>Faust</em> too, or 
the Morning Newspaper, gradually getting in) what Nature 
and Fact had decided they could never do. In which doubly 
fatal state, with Faust busier than ever among them, they 
continue at this moment,—working towards strange issues, 
I do believe!</p>
<p>Or, speaking in less figurative language, our conclusion is, 
<i>first</i>, That Parliaments, while they continued, as our English 
ones long did, mere Advisers of the Sovereign Ruler, were invaluable
institutions; and did, especially in periods when 
there was no <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i> Newspaper, or other general Forum free 
to every citizen who had three fingers and a smattering of 
grammar,—deserve well of mankind, and achieve services for 
which we should be always grateful. This is conclusion first. 
But then, alas, equally irrefragable comes conclusion <i>second</i>, 
That Parliaments when they get to try, as our poor British 
one now does, the art of governing by themselves as the 
Supreme Body in the Nation, make no figure in that capacity, 
and can make none, but by the very nature of the case are 
unable to do it. Only two instances are on record of Parliaments
having, in any circumstances, succeeded as Governing 
Bodies; and it is even <em>hoped</em>, or ought to be, by men 
generally, that there may not for another thousand years be 
a third!</p> 
<p>As not only our poor British Parliament of those years 
and decades, but all the sudden European Parliaments at 
Paris, Frankfort, Erfurt and elsewhere, are Parliaments which 
undertake that second or impossible function of governing as 
Parliaments, and must either do it, or sink in black anarchy 
one knows not whitherward,—the horoscope of Parliaments is 
by no means cheering at present; and good citizens may 
justly shudder, if their anticipations point that way, at the 
prospect of a Chartist Parliament here. For your Chartist 
Parliament is properly the consummation of that fatal tendency,
towards the above-mentioned impossible function, on the 
part of Parliaments. A tendency not yet consummated with 
us; for we still have other fragments of old Authority lodged 
elsewhere than in the Parliament, which still struggles here 
and there to accomplish a little governing though under 
strange conditions: and to install a Parliament of the Six 
Points would be precisely to extinguish with the utmost 
rapidity all such fragments, and solemnly by National Charter 
and Six Points, to bid the Parliament, “Be supreme King 
over us, thou, in all respects; and rule us, thou, since it is 
impossible for thee!”</p> 
<hr/>
<p>These are serious considerations, sufficient to create alarm 
and astonishment in any constitutional man. But really it 
grows late in the day with constitutional men; and it is time 
for them to look up from their Delolme. If the constitutional
man will take the old Delolme-Bentham spectacles off 
his nose, and look abroad into the Fact itself with such eyes 
as he may have, I consider he will find that reform in matters 
social does <em>not</em> now mean, as he has long sleepily fancied, 
reform in Parliament alone or chiefly or perhaps at all. My 
alarming message to him is, that the thing we vitally need 
is not a more and more perfectly elected Parliament, but 
some reality of a Ruling Sovereign to preside over Parliament;
that we have already got the former entity in some 
measure, but that we are farther than ever from the road 
towards the latter; and that if the latter be missed and not 
got, there is no life possible for us. A New Downing Street, 
an infinitely reformed Governing Apparatus; there some 
hope might lie. A Parliament, any conceivable Parliament, 
continuing to attempt the function of Governor, can lead us 
only into No-Government which is called Anarchy; and the 
more ‘reformed’ or Democratic you make it, the swifter will 
such consummation be.</p> 
<hr/>
<p>Men's hopes from a Democratic or otherwise reformed 
Parliament are various, and rather vague at present; but 
surely this, as the ultimate essence, lies and has always lain 
in the heart of them all: That hereby we shall succeed better 
in doing the commandment of Heaven, instead of everywhere 
violating or ignoring Heaven's commandment, and incurring 
Heaven's curse, as now. To ascertain better and better what 
the will of the Eternal was and is with us, what the Laws of 
the Eternal are, all Parliaments, Ecumenic Councils, Con- 
gresses, and other Collective Wisdoms, have had this for their 
object. This or else nothing easily conceivable,—except to 
merit damnation for themselves, and to get it too! Nevertheless,
in the inexplicable universal votings and debatings of 
these Ages, an idea or rather a dumb presumption to the 
contrary has gone idly abroad; and at this day, over extensive 
tracts of the world, poor human beings are to be found, 
whose practical belief it is that if we ‘vote’ this or that, so 
this or that will thenceforth <em>be</em>. “Who's to decide it?” they 
all ask, as if the whole or chief question lay there. “Who's 
to decide it?” asks the irritated British citizen, with a sneer 
in his tone. “Who's to decide it?” asks he, oftener than 
any other question of me. Decide it, O irritated British 
citizen ? Why, thou, and I, and each man into whose living 
soul the Almighty has breathed a gleam of understanding; 
we are all, and each of us for his own self, to decide it: and 
woe will befall us, each and all, if we don't decide it <em>aright</em>; 
according as the Almighty has already ‘decided’ it, as it has 
been appointed to be and to continue, before all human 
decidings and after them all!—</p>
<p>Practically men have come to imagine that the Laws of 
this Universe, like the laws of constitutional countries, are 
decided by voting; that it is all a study of division-lists, and 
for the Universe too, depends a little on the activity of the 
whipper-in. It is an idle fancy. The Laws of this Universe, 
of which if the Laws of England are not an exact transcript, 
they should passionately study to become such, are fixed by 
the everlasting congruity of things, and are not fixable or 
changeable by voting! Neither properly, we say, are the 
Laws of England, or those of any other land never so 
republican or red-republican, fixable or changeable by that 
poor foolish process; not at all, O constitutional Peter, much 
as it may astonish you! Voting is a method we have agreed 
upon for settling temporary discrepancies of opinion as to 
what is law or not law, in this small section of the Universe 
called England: a good temporary method, possessing some 
advantages; which does settle the discrepancy for the moment. 
Nay, if the votings were sincere and loyal, we might have 
some chance withal of being <em>right</em> as to the question, and of 
settling it blessedly forever;—though again, if the votings 
are insincere, selfish, almost professedly <em>dis</em>loyal, and given 
under the influence of beer and balderdash, we have the 
proportionate sad chance of being <em>wrong</em>, and so settling it 
under curses, to be fearfully unsettled again!</p>
<p>For I must remark to you, and reiterate to you, that a 
continued series of votings transacted incessantly for sessions 
long, with three-times-three readings, and royal assents as 
many as you like, cannot make a law the thing which <em>is</em> no 
law. No, that lies beyond them. They can make it a 
sheepskin Act of Parliament; and even hang men (though 
now with difficulty) for not obeying it:—and this they reckon 
enough; the idle fools! I tell you and them, it is a miserable 
blunder, this self-styled ‘law’ of theirs; and I for one will 
study either to have no concern with it, or else by all 
judicious methods to <em>dis</em>obey said blundering impious pretended
‘law.’ In which sad course of conduct, very unpleasant 
to my feelings, but needful at such times, the gods and all 
good men, and virtually these idle fools themselves, will be on 
my side; and so I shall succeed at length, in spite of obstacles; 
and the pretended ‘law’ will take down its gibbet-ropes, and 
abrogate itself, and march, with the town-drum beating in 
the rear of it, and beadles scourging the back of it, and 
ignominious idle clamour escorting it, to Chaos, one day; and 
the Prince of Darkness, Father of Delusions, Devil, or whatever
his name be, who is and was always <em>its</em> true proprietor, 
will again hold possession of it,—much good may it do 
him!</p> 
<p>My friend, do you think had the united Posterity of Adam 
voted, and since the Creation done nothing but vote, that 
three and three were seven,—would this have altered the 
laws of arithmetic; or put to the blush the solitary Cocker 
who continued to assert privately that three and three were 
six? I consider, not. And is arithmetic, think you, a thing 
more fixed by the Eternal, than the laws of justice are, and 
what the right is of man towards man? The builder of this 
world was Wisdom and Divine Foresight, not Folly and 
Chaotic Accident. Eternal Law is silently present, everywhere
and everywhen. By Law the Planets gyrate in their 
orbits;—by some approach to Law the Street-Cabs ply in 
their thoroughfares. No pin's point can you mark within the 
wide circle of the All where God's Laws are not. Unknown 
to you, or known (you had better try to know them a 
little!)—inflexible, righteous, eternal; not to be questioned 
by the sons of men. Wretched being, do you hope to 
prosper by assembling six-hundred and fifty-eight poor 
creatures in a certain apartment, and getting them, after 
debate, and “Divide,—'vide,—'vide,” and report in the 
<i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i>, to vote
what is <em>not</em> is? You will carry it, you, by 
your voting and your eloquencing and babbling; and the 
adamantine basis of the Universe shall bend to your third 
reading, and paltry bit of engrossed sheepskin and dog-latin? 
What will become of you?</p> 
<p>Unless perhaps the Almighty Maker has forgotten this 
miserable anthill of a Westminster, of an England; and has 
no Laws in force here which are of moment to Him? Not 
here and now; only in Judea, and distant countries at remote 
periods of time? Confess it, Peter, you have some cowardly 
notion to that effect, though ashamed to say so! Miserable 
soul! Don't you notice gravitation here, the law of birth 
and of death, and other laws? Peter, do you know why the 
Age of Miracles is past? Because you are become an 
enchanted human ass (I grieve to say it); and merely bray 
parliamentary eloquence; rejoice in chewed gorse, scrip 
coupons, or the like; and have no discernible ‘Religion,’ 
except a degraded species of Phallus-Worship, whose liturgy 
is in the Circulating Libraries!</p>
<p>In Parliaments, Constitutional Conclaves and Collective 
Wisdoms, it is too fatally certain there have been many things 
approved of, which it was found on trial Nature did not 
approve but disapprove. Nature told the individual trying 
to lead his life by such rule, No; the Nation of individuals, 
No. “Not this way, my children, though the wigs that prescribed
it were of great size, and the bowowing they enforced 
it with was loud; not by this way is victory and blessedness 
attainable; by other ways than this. Only stagnation, 
degradation, choked sewers, want of potatoes, uncultivated 
heaths, overturned mud-cabins, and at length Chartism, street- 
barricades, Red Republic, and Chaos come again, will prove 
attainable by this!”</p>
<p>Here below there is but one thing needful; one thing;— 
and that one will in nowise consent to be dispensed with! 
He that can ascertain, in England or elsewhere, what the 
laws of the Eternal are and walk by them voted for or unvoted,
with him it will be well; with him that misses said 
laws, and only gets himself voted for, not well. Voting, in 
fact, O Peter, is a thing I value but little in any time, and 
almost at zero in this. Not a divine thing at all, my poor 
friend, but a human; and in the beer-and-balderdash case, 
whatever constitutional doctors may say, almost a brutal. 
Voting, never a divine Apollo, was once a human Bottom 
the Weaver; and, so long as he continued in the sane and 
sincere state, was worth consulting about several things. 
But alas, enveloped now in mere stump-oratory, cecity, 
mutinous imbecility, and sin and misery, he is now an 
enchanted Weaver,—wooed by the fatuous Queen of constitutional
Faëry,—and feels his cheek hairy to the scratch. 
Beer rules him, and the Infinite of Balderdash; and except 
as a horse might vote for tares or hard beans, he had better, 
till he grow wise again, hardly vote at all. I will thank thee 
to take him away, into his own place, which is very low down 
indeed; and to put in the upper place something infinitely 
worthier. You ask what thing; in a triumphant manner, 
with erect ear and curved tail, O hapless quadruped? How 
can I tell <em>you</em> what thing? I myself know it, and every soul 
still human knows it, or may know; but to the soul that has 
fallen asinine, and thinks the Laws of God are to be voted 
for, it is unknowable.</p>
<hr/>
<p>‘If of ten men nine are recognisable as fools, which is a 
common calculation,’ says our <em>Intermittent</em> Friend, ‘how, in 
the name of wonder, will you ever get a ballot-box to grind 
you out a wisdom from the votes of these ten men? Never 
by any conceivable ballot-box, nor by all the machinery in 
Bromwicham or out of it, will you attain such a result. Not 
by any method under Heaven, except by suppressing, and in 
some good way reducing to zero, nine of those votes, can 
wisdom ever issue from your ten.</p>
<p>‘Why men have got so universally into such a fond ex- 
pectation? The reason might lead us far. The reason, alas, 
is, men have, to a degree never before exampled, forgotten 
that there is fixed eternal law in this Universe; that except 
by coming upon the dictates of that, no success is possible 
for any nation or creature. That we should have forgotten 
this,—alas, here is an abyss of vacuity in our much-admired 
opulence, which the more it is looked at saddens the thinking 
heart the more.</p>
<p>‘And yet,’ continues he elsewhere, ‘it is unavoidable and 
indispensable at present. With voting and ballot-boxing 
who can quarrel, as the matter stands? I pass it without 
quarrel; nay, say respectfully, “Good speed to you, poor 
friends: Heaven send you not only a good voting-box, but 
something worth voting for! Sad function yours, giving 
plumpers or split-votes for or against such a pair of human 
beings, and such a set of human causes. Adieu!”’</p>
<hr/>
<p>And yet surely, not in England only, where the Institution 
is like a second nature to us, but in all countries where men 
have attained any civilisation, it is good that there be a 
Parliament. Morning Newspapers, and other temporary or 
permanent changes of circumstances, may much change and 
almost infinitely abridge its function, but they never can 
abolish it. Under whatever reformed Downing Street, or 
indispensable new King, of these New Eras, England be 
governed, its Parliament too will continue indispensable. 
And it is much to be desired that all men saw clearly what 
the Parliament's real function, in these changed times of 
newspaper reporters and imaginary kings, had grown to be. 
We must set it to its real function; and, at our peril and its, 
restrict it to that! Its real function is the maximum of all 
we shall be able to get out of it. Wrap it in never so many 
sheepskins, and venerabilities of use-and-wont, you will not 
get it persuaded to do what its real function is <em>not</em>. Endless
derangement, spreading into futility on every side, and 
ultimate ruin even to its real function, will result to you 
from setting it to work against what Nature and Fact have 
appointed for it. Your Dray-wagon, excellent for carting 
beer along the streets,—start not with it from the chimney-tops,
as Chariot of the Sun; for it will not act in that 
capacity!—</p> 
<p>As a ‘Collective <em>Wisdom</em>’ of Nations the talking Parliament,
I discern too well, can never more serve. Wisdom 
dwells not with stump-oratory; to the stump-orator Wisdom 
has waved her sad and peremptory farewell. A Parliament, 
speaking through reporters to Buncombe and the Twenty-seven
millions mostly fools, has properly given up that 
function; that is not now the function it attempts. But 
even as the Condensed Folly of Nations; Folly bound up 
into articulate masses, and able to say Yes and No for itself, 
it will much avail the Governing Man! To know at what 
pitch the widespread Folly of the Nation now stands, what 
may safely be attempted with said Folly, and what not 
safely: this too is very indispensable for the Governing Man. 
Below <em>this</em> function, in the maddest times and with Faust of 
Mentz reverberating every madness <i xml:lang="la">ad infinitum</i>, no Parlia- 
ment can fall.</p> 
<p>Votes of men are worth collecting, if convenient. True, 
their opinions are generally of little wisdom, and can on 
occasion reach to all conceivable and inconceivable degrees of 
folly; but their instincts, where these can be deciphered, are 
wise and human; these, hidden under the noisy utterance of 
what they call their opinions, are the unspoken sense of man's 
heart, and well deserve attending to. Know well what the 
people inarticulately feel, for the Law of Heaven itself is 
dimly written there; nay, do not neglect, if you have opportunity,
to ascertain what they vote and say. One thing the 
stupidest multitude at a hustings can do, provided only it be 
sincere: Inform you how <em>it</em> likes this man or that, this proposed
law or that. “I do not like thee, Dr. Fell; the 
reason why I cannot tell,”—and perhaps indeed there is no 
reason; nevertheless let the Governor too be thankful to 
know the fact, ‘full well’; for it may be useful to him. 
Nay, the multitude, even when its nonsense is not sincere, but 
produced in great part by beer and stump-oratory, will yet 
by the very act of voting feel itself bound in honour; and so 
even in that case it apprises you, “Such a man, such a law, 
will I accept, being persuaded thereto by beer and stump-oratory,
and having polled at hustings for the same.”</p> 
<p>Beyond doubt it will be useful, will be indispensable, for 
the King or Governor to know what the mass of men think 
upon public questions legislative and administrative; what 
they will assent to willingly, what unwillingly; what they 
will resist with superficial discontents and remonstrances, what 
with obstinate determination, with riot, perhaps with armed 
rebellion. No Governor otherwise can go along with clear 
illumination on his path, however plain the loadstar and 
ulterior goal be to him; but at every step he must be liable 
to fall into the ditch; to awaken he knows not what nests of 
hornets, what sleeping dogkennels, better to be avoided. By 
all manner of means let the Governor inform himself of all 
this. To which end, Parliaments, Free Presses, and suchlike 
are excellent; they keep the Governor fully aware of what 
the People, wisely or foolishly, think. Without in some way 
knowing it with moderate exactitude, he has not a possibility 
to govern at all. For example, the Chief Governor of Constantinople,
having no Parliament to tell it him, knows it 
only by the frequency of incendiary fires in his capital, the 
frequency of bakers hanged at their shop-lintels; a most 
inferior <i xml:lang="la">ex-postfacto</i> method!—Profitable indisputably, essential 
in all cases where practicable, to know clearly what and where 
the obstacles are. Marching with noble aim, with the 
heavenly loadstars ever in your eye, you will thus choose your 
path with the prudence which is also noble, and reach your 
aim surely, if more slowly.</p> 
<p>With the real or seeming slowness we do not quarrel. 
The winding route, on uneven surfaces, may often be the 
swiftest; that is a point for your own prudences, practical 
sagacities, and qualities as a King: the indispensable point, 
for both you and us, is that you do always advance, unresting 
if unhasting, and know in every fibre of you that arrive you 
must. Rigidly straight routes find some admiration with the 
vulgar, and are rather apt to please at hustings; but we know 
well enough they are no clear sign of strength of purpose. 
The Leming-rat, I have been told, travelling in myriads sea- 
ward from the hills of Norway, turns not to the right or 
the left: if these rats meet a haystack, they eat their way 
through it; if a stone house, they try the same feat, and 
not being equal to eating the house, climb the walls of it, 
pour over the roof of it, and push forward on the old line, 
swimming or ferrying rivers, scaling or rounding precipices; 
most consistent Leming-rats. And what is strange, too, 
their errand seaward is properly none. They all perish, 
before reaching the sea, or of hunger on the sand-beach; 
their consistent rigidly straight journey was a journey no-whither!
I do not ask your Lordship to imitate the 
Leming-rat.</p>
<p>But as to universal suffrage, again,—can it be proved that, 
since the beginning of the world, there was ever given a 
universal vote in favour of the worthiest man or thing? I 
have always understood that true worth, in any department, 
was difficult to recognise; that the worthiest, if he appealed 
to universal suffrage, would have but a poor chance. John 
Milton, inquiring of universal England what the worth of 
<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paradise Lost</i> was, received for answer, Five Pounds Sterling. 
George Hudson, inquiring in like manner what his services on 
the railways might be worth, received for answer (prompt 
temporary answer), Fifteen Hundred Thousand ditto. Alas, 
Jesus Christ asking the Jews what <em>he</em> deserved, was not the 
answer, Death on the gallows!—Will your Lordship believe 
me, I feel it almost a shame to insist on such truisms. Surely 
the doctrine of judgment by vote of hustings has sunk now, 
or should be fast sinking, to the condition of obsolete with 
all but the commonest of human intelligences. With me, 
I must own, it has never had any existence. The mass 
of men consulted at hustings, upon any high matter whatsoever,
is as ugly an exhibition of human stupidity as this 
world sees.</p>
<p>Universal suffrage assembled at hustings,—I will consult 
it about the quality of New-Orleans pork, or the coarser kinds 
of Irish butter; but as to the character of men, I will if 
possible ask it no question: or if the question be asked and 
the answer given, I will generally consider, in cases of any 
importance, that the said answer is likely to be wrong, that 
I have to listen to the said answer and receive it as authentic, 
and for my own share to go, and with whatever strength may 
lie in me, do the reverse of the same. Even so, your Lordship;
for how should I follow a multitude to do evil? There 
are such things as multitudes all full of beer and nonsense, 
even of insincere factitious nonsense, who by hypothesis 
cannot but be wrong. Or what safety will there be in a 
thousand or ten thousand brawling potwallopers, or blockheads
of any rank whatever, if the Fact, namely the whole 
Universe and the Eternal Destinies, be against me? These 
latter I for my share will try to follow, even if alone in doing 
so. It will be better for me.</p>
<p>Your Lordship, there are fools, cowards, knaves, and 
gluttonous traitors true only to their own appetite, in 
immense majority, in every rank of life; and there is nothing 
frightfuler than to see these voting and deciding! “Not 
your way, my unhappy brothers, shall it be decided; no, not 
while I, and ‘a company of poor men’ you may have heard 
of, live in this world. Vote it as you please,” my friend Oliver 
was wont to say or intimate; “vote it so, if you like; there 
is a company of poor men that will spend all their blood 
before they see it settled so!”—Who, in such sad moments, 
but has to <em>hate</em> the profane vulgar, and feel that he must and 
will debar it from him! And alas, the vulgarest vulgar, I 
often find, are not those in ragged coats at this day; but 
those in fine, superfine, and superfinest;—the more is the 
pity! Superfine coat symbolically indicates, like official 
stamp and signature, <i>Bank-of-England Thousand-Pound Note</i>; 
and blinkard owls, in city and country, accept it cheerfully as 
such: but look closer, you may find it mere <i>Bank of Elegance</i>; 
a flash-note travelling towards the eternal Fire;—and will 
have nothing to do with it, you, I hope!</p>
<hr/>
<p>Clearly enough, the King in constitutional countries would 
wish to ascertain all men's votes, their opinions, volitions on 
all manner of matters; that so his whole scene of operations, 
to the last cranny of it, might be illuminated for him, and he, 
wherever he were working, might work with perfect knowledge
of the circumstances and materials. But the King, 
New Downing Street, or whatever the Sovereign's name is, 
will be a very poor King indeed if he <em>admit</em> all these votes 
into his system of procedure, and transform them into acts; 
—indeed I think, in that case, he will not be long for this 
world as a King! No: though immense acclamation attend 
him at the first outset in that course, every volition and opinion 
finding itself admitted into the poor King's procedure,—
yet unless the volitions and opinions are wise and not foolish, 
not the smallest ultimate prosperity can attend him; and all 
the acclamations of the world will not save him from the 
ignominious lot which Nature herself has appointed for all 
creatures that do not follow the Law which Nature has laid 
down.</p>
<p>You ask this and the other man what is his opinion, his 
notion, about varieties of things: and having ascertained 
what his notion is, and carried it off as a piece of information, 
—surely you are bound, many times, most times if you are 
a wise man, to go directly in the teeth of it, and for his sake 
and for yours to do directly the contrary of it. Any man's 
opinion one would accept; all men's opinion, could it be 
had absolutely without trouble, might be worth accepting. 
Nay, on certain points I even ask my horse's opinion:—as to 
whether beans will suit him at this juncture, or a truss of 
tares; on this and the like points I carefully consult my 
horse; gather, by such language as he has, what my horse's 
candid opinion as to beans or the truss of tares is, and 
unhesitatingly follow the same. As what prudent rider 
would not? There is no foolishest man but knows one and 
the other thing more clearly than any the wisest man does; 
no glimmer of human or equine intelligence but can disclose 
something which even the intelligence of a Newton, <em>not</em> 
present in that exact juncture of circumstances, would not 
otherwise have ascertained. To such length you would 
gladly consult all equine, and much more all human intelli- 
gences:—to such length; and, strictly speaking, not any 
farther.</p> 
<p>Of what use towards the general result of finding out what 
it is wise to do,—which is the one thing needful to all men 
and nations,—can the fool's vote be ? It is either coincident 
with the wise man's vote, throwing no new light on the 
matter, and therefore superfluous; or else it is contradictory, 
and therefore still more superfluous, throwing mere darkness 
on the matter, and imperatively demanding to be annihilated, 
and returned to the giver with protest. Woe to you if you 
leave that valid! There are expressions of volition too, as 
well as of opinion, which you collect from foolish men, and 
even from inferior creatures: these can do you no harm, 
these it may be very beneficial for you to have and know;—
but these also, surely it is often imperative on you to contradict,
and would be ruinous and baleful for you to <em>follow</em>. 
You have to apprise the unwise man, even as you do the 
unwiser horse: “On the truss of tares I took your vote, and 
have cheerfully fulfilled it; but in regard to choice of roads 
and the like, I regret to say you have no competency whatever.
No, my unwise friend, we are for Hammersmith and 
the West, not for Highgate and the Northern parts, on this 
occasion: not by that left turn, by this turn to the right 
runs our road; thither, for reasons too intricate to explain 
at this moment, it will behove thee and me to go: Along, 
therefore!”—</p> 
<p>“But how?” your Lordship asks, and all the world with 
you: “Are not two men stronger than one; must not two 
votes carry it over one?” I answer; No, nor two thousand 
nor two million. Many men vote; but in the end, you will 
infallibly find, none counts except the few who were <em>in the 
right</em>. Unit of that class, against as many zeros as you like! 
If the King's thought <em>is</em> according to the will of God, or to 
the law appointed for this Universe, I can assure your Lordship
the King will ultimately carry that, were he but one in 
it against the whole world.</p>
<p>It is not by rude force, either of muscle or of will, that one 
man can govern twenty men, much more twenty millions of 
men. For the moment, if all the twenty are stark against 
his resolution never so wise, the twenty for the moment must 
have their foolish way; the wise resolution, for the moment, 
cannot be carried. Let their votes be taken, or known (as 
is often possible) without taking; and once well taken, let 
them be weighed,—which latter operation, also an essential 
one for the King or Governor, is very difficult. If the weight 
be in favour of the Governor, let him in general proceed; 
cheerfully accepting adverse account of heads, and dealing 
wisely with that according to his means;—often enough, in 
pressing cases, flatly disregarding that, and walking through 
the heart of it; for in general it is but frothy folly and loud-blustering
rant and wind.</p>
<p>I have known minorities, and even small ones by the 
account of heads, do grand national feats long memorable 
to all the world, in these circumstances. Witness Cromwell 
and his Puritans; a minority at all times, by account of 
heads; yet the authors or saviours, as it ultimately proved, 
of whatsoever is divinest in the things we can still reckon ours 
in England. Minority by tale of heads; but weighed in 
Heaven's balances, a most clear majority: this ‘company of 
poor men that will spend their blood rather,’ on occasion 
shown,—it has now become a noble army of heroes, whose 
conquests were appointed to endure forever. Indeed it is on 
such terms that grand national and other feats, by the sons 
of Adam, are generally done. Not without risk and labour 
to the doers of them; no surely, for it never was an easy 
matter to do the real will of a Nation, much more the real 
will of this Universe in respect to a Nation. No, that is 
difficult and heroic; easy as it is to count the voting heads 
of a Nation at any time, and do the behests of their beer and 
balderdash; empty behests, very different from even their 
‘will,’ poor blockheads, to say nothing of the Nation's will 
and the Universe's will! Which two, especially which latter, 
are alone worth doing.</p>
<p>But if not only the number but the weight of votes preponderate
against your Governor, he, never so much in the 
right, will find it wise to hold his hand; to delay, for a time, 
this his beneficent execution, which is ultimately inevitable 
and indispensable, of Heaven's Decrees; the Nation being 
still unprepared. He will leave the bedarkened Nation yet 
a while alone. What can he do for it, if not even a small 
minority will stand by him? Let him strive to enlighten 
the Nation; let him pray, and in all ways endeavour, that 
the Nation be enlightened,—that a small minority may open 
their eyes and hearts to the message of Heaven, which he, 
heavy-laden man and governor, <em>has</em> been commissioned to see 
done in this transitory earth, at his peril! Heaven's message, 
sure enough, if it be true; and Hell's if it be not, though 
voted for by innumerable two-legged animals without feathers 
or with!</p> 
<p>On the whole, honour to small minorities, when they are 
genuine ones. Severe is their battle sometimes, but it is 
victorious always like that of gods. Tancred of Hauteville's 
sons, some eight centuries ago, conquered all Italy; bound it 
up into organic masses, of vital order after a sort; founded 
thrones and principalities upon the same, which have not yet 
entirely vanished,—which, the last dying wrecks of which, 
still wait for some worthier successor, it would appear. The 
Tancred Normans were some Four Thousand strong; the 
Italy they conquered in open fight, and bound up into masses 
at their ordering will, might count Eight Millions, all as 
large of bone, as eupeptic and black-whiskered as they. How 
came the small minority of Normans to prevail in this so 
hopeless-looking debate? Intrinsically, doubt it not, because 
they were in the right; because, in a dim, instinctive, but 
most genuine manner, they were doing the commandment of 
Heaven, and so Hearen had decided that they were to prevail. 
But extrinsically also, I can see, it was because the Normans 
were <em>not</em> afraid to have their skin scratched; and were 
prepared to die in their quarrel where needful. One man of 
that humour among a thousand of the other, consider it! 
Let the small minority, backed by the whole Universe, and 
looked on by such a cloud of invisible witnesses, fall into no 
despair.</p>
<hr/>
<p>What is to become of Parliament in the New Era, is less 
a question with me than what is to become of Downing 
Street. With a reformed Downing Street strenuously bent 
on real and not imaginary management of our affairs, I could 
foresee all manner of reform to England and its Parliament ; 
and at length in the gradual course of years, that highest 
acme of reform to Parliament and to England, a New 
Governing Authority, a real and not imaginary King set to 
preside there. With that, to my view, comes all blessedness 
whatsoever; without that comes, and can come, nothing but, 
with ever-accelerated pace, <strong>Anarchy</strong>; or the <em>declaration</em> of 
the fact that we have no Governor, and have long had none.</p>
<p>For the rest, Anarchy advances as with seven-league boots, 
in these years. Either some New Downing Street and 
Incipiency of a real Hero-Kingship again, or else Chartist 
Parliament, with Apotheosis of Attorneyism, and Anarchy 
very undeniable to all the world: one or else the other, it 
seems to me, we shall soon have. Under a real Kingship 
the Parliament, we may rest satisfied, would gradually, with 
whatever difficulty, get itself inducted to its real function, 
and restricted to that, and moulded to the form fittest for 
that. If there can be no reform of Downing Street, I care 
not much for the reform of Parliament. Our doom, I perceive,
is the Apotheosis of Attorneyism; into that blackest of 
terrestrial curses we must plunge, and take our fate there like 
the others.</p> 
<p>For the sake both of the New Downing Street and of 
whatever its New Parliament may be, let us add here, what 
will vitally concern both these Institutions, a few facts, 
much forgotten at present, on the general question of Enfranchisement;
—and therewith end. Who is slave, and 
eternally appointed to be governed; who free, and eternally 
appointed to govern? It would much avail us all to settle 
this question.</p>
<hr/>
<p> Slave or free is settled in Heaven for a man; acts of par- 
liament attempting to settle it on earth for him, sometimes 
make sad work of it. Now and then they correctly copy 
Heaven's settlement in regard to it; proclaim audibly what 
is the silent fact, “Here is a free man, let him be honoured!” 
—and so are of the nature of a God's Gospel to other men 
concerned. Far oftenest they quite miscopy Heaven's settlement,
and copy merely the account of the Ledger, or some 
quite other settlement in regard to it; proclaiming with 
an air of discovery, “Here is a Ten-pounder; here is a 
Thousand-pounder; Heavens, here is a Three-million pounder,—
is not he free?” Nay, they are wont, here in England for 
some time back, to proclaim in the gross, as if it had become 
credible lately, all two-legged animals without feathers to be 
‘free.’ “Here is a distressed Nigger,” they proclaim, “who 
much prefers idleness to work,—should not he be free to 
choose which? Is not he a man and brother? Clearly here 
are two legs and no feathers: let us vote him Twenty 
millions for enfranchisement, and so secure the blessing of 
the gods!”—</p>
<p>My friends, I grieve to remind you, but it is eternally the 
fact: Whom Heaven has made a slave, no parliament of men 
nor power that exists on Earth can render free. No; he is 
chained by fetters which parliaments with their millions 
cannot reach. You can label him free; yes, and it is but 
labelling him a solecism,—bidding him be the parent of 
solecisms wheresoever he goes. You can give him pumpkins, 
houses of tenpound rent, houses of ten-thousand pound: the 
bigger candle you light within the slave-image of him, it will 
but show his slave-features on the larger and more hideous 
scale. Heroism, manful wisdom is not his: many things you 
can give him, but that thing never. Him the Supreme 
Powers marked in the making of him, <i>slave</i>; appointed him, 
at his and our peril, not to command but to obey, in this 
world. Him you cannot enfranchise, not him; to proclaim 
this man free is not a God's Gospel to other men; it is an 
alarming Devil's Gospel to himself and to us all. Devil's 
Gospel little feared in these days; but brewing for the whole 
of us its big oceans of destruction all the same. States are 
to be called happy and noble in so far as they settle rightly 
who is slave and who free; unhappy, ignoble, and doomed to 
destruction, as they settle it wrong.</p>
<p>We may depend on it, Heaven in the most constitutional 
countries knows well who is slave, who is not. And with 
regard to voting, I lay it down as a rule, No real <em>slave's</em> vote 
is other than a nuisance, whensoever or wheresoever or in 
what manner soever it be given. That is a truth, No slave's 
vote;—and, alas, here is another not quite so plain, though 
equally certain, That as Nature and severe Destiny, not mere 
act of Parliament and possession of money-capital, determine 
a man's slavehood,—so, by these latter, it has been, in innumerable
instances, determined <em>wrong</em> just at present! Instances
evident to everybody, and instances suspected by 
nobody but the more discerning:—the fact is, slaves are in a 
tremendous majority everywhere; and the voting of them 
(not to be got rid of just yet) is a nuisance in proportion. 
Nuisance of proportionally tremendous magnitude, properly 
indeed the grand fountain of all other nuisances whatsoever.</p>
<p>For it is evident, could you entirely exclude the slave's vote, 
and admit only the heroic free man's vote,—folly, knavery, 
falsity, gluttonous imbecility, lowmindedness and cowardice 
had, if not disappeared from the earth, reduced themselves to 
a rigorous minimum in human affairs; the ultimate New Era, 
and best possible condition of human affairs, had actually 
come. This is what I always pray for; rejoicing in everything
that furthers it, sorrowing for everything that furthers 
the reverse of it. And though I know it is yet a great way 
off, I know also either that it is inevitably coming, or that 
human society, and the possibility of man's living on this 
earth, has ended. And so for England too, nay, I think for 
England most and soonest of all, it will be behooveful that 
we attain some rectification, innumerable rectifications, in 
regard to this essential matter; and contrive to bid our 
Heaven's free men vote, and our Heaven's slaves be silent, 
with infinitely more correctness than at present. Either on 
the hither brink of that black sea of Anarchy, wherein other 
Nations at present lie drowning and plunging, or after weltering
through the same, if we can welter,—it will have to be 
attained. In some measure, in some manner, attained: life 
depends on that, death on the missing of that.</p>
<hr/>
<p>New definitions of slavery are pressingly wanted just now. 
The definition of a free man is difficult to find, so that all 
men could distinguish slave from free; found, it would be 
invaluable! The free man once universally recognised, we 
should know him who had the privilege to vote and assist in 
commanding, at least to go himself uncommanded. Men do 
not know his definition well at present; never knew it worse; 
—hence these innumerable sorrows.</p> 
<p>The free man is he who is <em>loyal</em> to the Laws of this 
Universe; who in his heart sees and knows, across all contradictions,
that injustice <em>cannot</em> befall him here; that 
except by sloth and cowardly falsity evil is not possible here. 
The first symptom of such a man is not that he resists and 
rebels, but that he obeys. As poor Henry Marten wrote in 
Chepstow Castle long ago, 
<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
    <p>
        <span>“Reader, if thou an oft-told tale wilt trust,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Thou'lt gladly do and suffer what thou must.”</span>
    </p>
</blockquote>
Gladly; he that will go gladly to his labour and his suffering, 
it is to him alone that the Upper Powers are favourable and 
the Field of Time will yield fruit. ‘An oft-told tale,’ friend 
Harry; all the noble of this world have known it, and in 
various dialects have striven to let us know it! The essence 
of all ‘religion’ that was and that will be, is to make men 
<em>free</em>. Who is he that, in this Life-pilgrimage, will consecrate 
himself at all hazards to obey God and God's servants, and 
to disobey the Devil and his? With pious valour this free 
man walks through the roaring tumults, invincibly the way 
whither he is bound. To him in the waste Saharas, through 
the grim solitudes peopled by galvanised corpses and doleful 
creatures, there is a loadstar; and his path, whatever those 
of others be, is towards the Eternal. A man well worth 
consulting, and taking the vote of, about matters temporal; 
and properly the only kind of man. Though always an 
exceptional, this was once a well-known man. He has become 
one of the rarest now;—but is not yet entirely extinct; and 
will become more plentiful, if the Gods intend to keep this 
Planet habitable long.</p>
<p>Him it were vain to try to find always without mistake; 
alas, if he were in the majority, this world would be all ‘a 
school of virtue,’ which it is far from being. Nevertheless to 
him, and in all times to him alone, belongs the rule of this 
world: that he be got to rule, that he be forbidden to rule 
and not got, means salvation or destruction to the world. 
Friend Peter, I am perfectly deliberate in calling this the 
truest doctrine of the constitution you have ever heard. And 
I recommend you to learn it gradually, and to lay it well to 
heart; for without it there is no salvation, and all other 
doctrines of the constitution are leather and prunella. Will 
any mass of Chancery parchments, think you, of respectablest 
traditions and Delolme philosophies, save a man or People that 
forgets this, from the eternal fire? There does burn such a 
<em>fire</em> everywhere under this green earth-rind of ours, and 
London pavements themselves (as Paris pavements have done) 
can start up into sea-ridges, with a horrible ‘trough of the 
sea,’ if the fire-flood urge!</p> 
<p>To this man, I say, belongs eternally the government of the 
world. Where he reigns, all is blessed; and the gods rejoice, 
and only the wicked make wail. Where the contrary of him 
reigns, all is accursed; and the gods lament,—and will, by 
terrible methods, rectify the matter by and by! Have you 
forbidden this man to rule? Obey he cannot where the 
Devil and his servants rule; how can he? He must die 
thrice ruined, damned by the gods, if he do. He will retire 
rather, into deserts and rocky inaccessibilities, companion to 
wild-beasts, to the dumb granites and the eternal stars, far 
from you and your affairs. You and your affairs, once well 
quit of him, go by a swift and ever swifter road!</p> 
<hr/>
<p>I would recommend your Lordship to attack straightway, 
by the <i>Industrial Regiments</i> or better otherwise, that huge 
Irish and British Pauper Question, which is evidently the 
father of questions for us, the <em>lowest</em> level in our ‘universal 
stygian quagmire’; and to try whether (without ballot-box) 
there are no ‘kings’ discoverable in England who would rally 
round you, in practical attempt towards draining said quagmire
from that point. And to be swift about it; for the 
time presses,—and if your Lordship is not ready, I think the 
ballot-boxes and the six points are fast getting ready!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
